O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I have completed this book for you, dear son, which is the summary of medical knowledge together with its completion, and have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is foreign to all things everywhere, the science is destroyed and decayed, and there remains nothing of it that the hands have not changed, except for the small descriptions in books from the ancients.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off and learning is removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It appears that I will vivify it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of iron cauteries, and the other instruments of work accompanied by the statement of their declaration and preparation, as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hand are found in our time, the art of medicine has become extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who engages in this should be trained in the science of anatomy as Galen says, to such a degree that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, ligaments, and the number of muscles, and the demenement and movement of veins and arteries, and the direction of their outlets.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore, Hippocrates says that the hand with the thumb is much, and with work is little; and the same applies in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the beginning of this book, we say to those who are not learned in the matters previously mentioned that they beware lest they choose incorrectly and operate on men; thus I have often seen more of those who engage themselves in this science and abandon their knowledge and sense of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who opened one abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in the neck; thus so much blood flowed out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And another man who removed an arrow from a man's side, and the arrow was large; he carried with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within two days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had been called to treat it before, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the arrow, and knew well that if it were not cut off, he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And another man took care of one duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was an injury; and the ignorant healers bound the break over the wound with strong sutures, and left no skin at the wound, and let it be in this state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated; and it remained thus until the leg swelled up completely and the toes came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come untie the leg; and when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every corruption of a limb was already confirmed and could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop moving through the limb until all the limb was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another mirror that collapsed and then swelled due to the malice of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humour, should not be touched with iron unless it can completely remove what is corrupt in it.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, operations where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Because of this it is necessary that you take care, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you. Take up your weapons in defense, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method, so that by God's grace you come to salvation and be praised; and abandon hopeless diseases, and discard your weapons from what causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen advises in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of bad disease, lest you be called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have designed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about cauterization with fire and against cauterization with medicine for ague, and this chapter is arranged from the head down to the feet; and the forms of instruments, and the ironwork of cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about ventouse and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is arranged with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the humors and their harm is a long and subtle science and secret responses; and many wise men spoke about it and agreed with it; but they did not give us enough words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally for all constitutions where there is matter, whether it be two constitutions: namely hot and wet constitution or dry and wet constitution.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry constitution together with matter, some have spoken and said that the fire cautery is great help; and others have said the opposite: that the cautery does not benefit in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; and he who said otherwise that cautery provides great help for hot and dry disease in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you comprehend the body of man and his heat to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere except by those who have tried it and know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their occurrences and the time span; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the people gathered together and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing and has more goodness than cautery from burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not harm any other part except the one being heated.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medicines coming from one member to another while they are apart bring diseases of severe pain to the affected member; and by chance, fire may kill the patient due to its heat or the goodness of its substance, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	I have found this through experiment and the long service and study that I have put into my art, and it was in line with the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of speech, as I do not wish to deprive you of the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it subdues diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstration; accept this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be done and chose their companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harmful events occurring are suppressed by the aid of cautery; and similarly if cauteries are necessary for pain relief, it cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think so ever, dear child, as the foolish mind does; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say it this way; but it is not as they think, because cauteries are nothing more than medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors causing pain, and works faster than other medicines due to its power and its virtue.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease itself and its power; and superfluities gather in him through the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as in the case of cauteries for pain, and similar cases, and that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand at all why cauteries are called the rear of medicine; but they do not believe that cauteries have any value after medicine; however, their intentions are false; and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron ones, but they did not say this without reason, due to the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; they also said that the lees of the cautery do not cause inflammation, but this is not true as I have proven, and I have found it to be true for some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed, when you heat something with gold, you do not know when it is hot due to the color of the gold, and it can suddenly cool down, or if heated too much, it makes fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery which we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Moreover, I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	hot olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for coldness and moistness on the brain, and in it there are two ways that one does this due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient is purged with a soluble medicine cleansing the head for three or four nuis (days) according to what the virtues and age and accustomance of the patient can tolerate; and then heat is applied to the back of the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make the patient sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on a soft surface; afterward, place the root of your palm on the root of its neck between its two eyes; and where the elbows will come, it will bleed thereafter, then heat the cautery called "olivare", as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place the hot cautery on the spot marked with ink, and draw it along while pulling and twisting your finger; then remove your finger immediately, and watch the spot to see if you can see a small bone; if you cannot see it, repeat the cautery process until you do as I have told you; afterward, take one pinch of wax, wrap it in soft cotton, and put it on the spot, and leave it for three days; afterwards, put soft butter on top; and leave it until the burn is healed; after that, treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason, if necessary, assist with leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said that one should let the cautery rest for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then heal the burnt bone part.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other said that the cautery should be left for so long, and pushed down with such force as to break the bone as wide as .i. vertoil (approximately 2 fingers) because the humors flow out; then the wound must be left open for a long time, afterwards it must be healed and soothed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in all cases, except for some men with fear; and it seems to me that I should let them be; because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other limbs; and also when the head of the sick person is weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems more healing and beneficial to me, and from this method I work in such a way that it brings salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When there comes chronic and lasting pain in the head, the patient should use warm herbs and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head, oils, and plasters; and if they perform cautery on it, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	If the patient's headache is strong, be careful that it is not too cold; then cauterize under that cautery a little bit as we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cautery on each horn of the head as we have said before, and perform one cautery called "vasselz"; it is a little cauterizer in which ventouses are placed; align your hand so you cannot see the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about that later; and the cauteries on the horns should be finer than those with which one cauterizes the midline of the head, and this is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil (brain), and the head is purged with diverse medicines, and other treatments have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and yet it does not help; then cauteries are made according to two ways, that is, with hot medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot medicine is that you take a hot iron and remove the bark from it, and then place one piece of this heated iron on each side of the painful area, so that you can place the hot iron under the skin; and when it is placed in this way, keep the iron under the skin and leave it for twelve hours; then release the iron and treat the wound fiercely and let the wound heal for two or three days; then cover it with linen dipped in butter so that it can be applied again.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it heals; and if you see that someone uses some medicines burning as I have written or ten times treats with burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery should be like this.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the iron cautery in the shape specified here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "close" because the head is made in the shape of a cross or with .1 inch of curvature and a small size; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and move the iron slightly, but not too much so that half of its thickness burns; and withdraw your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which is away from it, and let blood flow abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the wound and leaving it for three days; then put dampened cotton on top of it; and heal the shoulder with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this dislocation using the cautery called "cultellare", all around the tip, be careful not to touch the artery in this dislocation which should not be old.
de emigraine	of the dislocation
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating dislocation as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases and it does not improve, and you see that cauterizing before mentioned medicine and iron do not help, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and place it against the side of the wound with a line of half a finger's length, and press once with your hand without touching the artery and without going to the bone; beware of the jaw that stops speech when one eats, and do not let nerves have regard for the mute and spasms come to the patient, and beware of corruption of blood from the artery when it is cut or fear comes too much and especially to those who are not familiar with it, and are not students and tested; leave the operation in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is explained in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter about the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	for the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear has pain due to coldness, and it has been treated with soluble medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "pins", which is made as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After marking all around the sick ear, or around both of them where the pain is located, move away slightly from the root of the ear since you have signed the place; and place 10 points around each ear; after curing it until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth cautery
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	A cautery is only used to treat tumors that move due to fluid, as we have said in the classification of diseases; and do not apply a cautery to similar conditions arising from sores or nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture which mutes the flow of blood from eyes, and purges the head and throat, and this is ineffective, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little further from the temple, and the third at the junction of the lips; place the cautery on the part that opens healthy, and make the cautery towards the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a fist; and leave the cautery until half of the hair is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the shape of the scalpel we have mentioned earlier, but it is slightly more subtle and the blades should be a little thicker; after treating the wound as I have previously stated, allow it to heal when it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	If apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the forehead, and one where the wound is called "vas" as we have previously stated, and the last cautery on the stomach mouth; treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	From the littera (or litterary)
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	In this illness, give the patient large years and round pills made from the brain of a rooster; then place the plaster of mustard seed (sinapis) on the head of the patient, which is written or treated with plasters; and this is the way of cautery: if it is done as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is a wound in the head or neck, it is good; and if it is not, make four cauterizations of the vein on the head descending to the neck, with a space between each cauterization of two fingers wide; and cure it as others do; and if you see it needs more, make one in the middle; and if necessary, make two others over the two horns, and cure it until it is healed; and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head of the patient should be cleaned for years and as we have said before; after that, anoint the head of the sick person, then make a fire cautery on the head and one at each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the sick person is weak, and the disease is severe, do four cauteries on the spine of the back; leave it until the most painful part is burned, then cool your hand; after that, cure it until it is healed, and remove the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use a fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to modify the head with various treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and enduring to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make them gargle and often chew food to modify the head; afterwards heat the skull with a pestle, and perform one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the fontanelle, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and enduring, perform cauteries as I have said for him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cauteries be olive-oil according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, perform one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupt and large phlegms, then the cautery of such kind should be applied as we have said to those who suffer from paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	If due to melancholy, the excesses decline towards melancholy and the body of the patient is wet, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been mentioned earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the king, let the patient's head be anointed with one linen cloth well made, also like a circle, place it on his head; and the patient should cross his arms, and he should be well held from all sides; after that, anoint him, using old butter of goats; and heat the cloth carefully, so that it can be tolerable for him to endure it; afterwards, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance, until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you wish to cauterize (someone), make multiple pricks all over with the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterizing increases the brain greatly; then put cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first with the signs I have said in the division, then you should begin and give the patient something purifying the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to lie down on his back, make a fire cautery at the back of his head, and make two cauteries on the two temples where the swelling of the eye is located or if it's on one temple; and strike with the entire cautery all the veins and arteries that are underneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and take care to prevent bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by your power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how to extend it; and sometimes a cautery or hot iron is made underneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the eyes' tears are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or they are near the arteries that appear on the forehead; and it is seen that it is cold, fleumatic superfluities, then you make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the awesending to the eyes: i.e., cautery under the forehead, and 2 cauteries above the temples, and 2 cauteries or haiterel beneath the 2 bones; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the body of the tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	If you treat it according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give a sick person 2 nightshades; after which, heat the head and make cautery or oil cautery on the head; and make 2 cauterizations called "clavilis" above the eyebrows, a little below the hairline; be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is the shape of it:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to make two cauteries on the two serpents as long as they are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted into sweat, and they prick oil, and a cauterization is performed according to two methods, namely by fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy position; afterwards on paper draw a figure similar to the fennel seed, and it should be the beginning of the sign where the hairs are; then place cotton soaked in egg glair and musk-scented persillaire oil over the oil. Then heat the cauterizer according to the following form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have signed several times, let the blisters be burned in that place; and the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it for 3 days, then put soft cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards, apply ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened then repeat the cautery on that same place as you did earlier; and if the hairs are falling out, cauterize it until the paper is raised to its natural position, and they are even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical hot cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, from each one an ounce, grind them together well; and do it quickly so it does not cool, then spread it onto the form you made like the myrtle leaf, and put paper on top of it; if the patient has pain in one oil only, it should be operated on in one, and if in both as well; and put cotton soaked in egg white under the oil; and the patient's head should be kept healthy and you press your finger every once in a while showing above the medicine, and move it all the times when the patient feels burning sensation from the medicine, because it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, administer the medicine to your arm.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the mordication (?) has passed, lift up the level of the shoulder and look to see if the paper is raised as it was lifted by the constrainment of fire or by incision; and if it is like this, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If this is not the case, then put more medicine on the shoulder or the medicine has not worked, as long as your actions are even and your eyes focused; then put cotton soaked in butter until the blisters have closed, after curing the wound with ointment called "diaphensis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if it is necessary for you to take good care of your work with great vigilance, so that no medication touches the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 If the paper becomes soft afterward and the hairs prick in the oil, start the medicine again on that spot which has been properly treated with clean paper, as you have done before; after it is healed, it should be shaped like a feather of the thistle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eye of men is diverse in size and smallness, according to which you should adjust your techniques; do not deviate from the correct path for him who is engaged in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When curing a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on a clean surface and hold it still between your hands so that it does not move or shift; then put cotton soaked in egg white or fresh linseed oil on the area to be cauterized; after heating the cautery, apply it to the affected area shaped like the tip of a feather, ensuring that the cautery is also applied; if you see, it should be pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, it should resemble a tent; however, even if the cauterized area looks different, it still serves for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, drain the pus forcefully; afterwards place the hot iron cauterizer on top, keep your hand on the cauterizer at the part of the neck near the oil, so that your hands do not make a mistake; and place the cauterizer in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If that is not the case, start the cautery again once, and if necessary, leave it for three days; after it put wet cotton in butter, and treat the ointment drying until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king, according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And here is a method of fire cautery that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Place a fistula, then open the wound; afterwards put in it the camahan substance, which is its shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make the quantity of one pound of plaster; hold your hand firmly and do not let the patient move at all, until the plaster solidifies; it is necessary that you place the oil on the patient's cotton wool soaked in egg white or water: the plaster will seal the wound, and the healthy part heals marvelously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 If the fistula has been healed by the fire cautery we have said, that's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, it is necessary to administer hot mustard and bring the fistula to the heat of mustard according to its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur in lips, which are called "poil," and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When treating these cracks as we have mentioned in the previous lines, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And immediately place it into these cracks until it reaches the bottom; then cover the area with cerote (cerotum) until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after becoming purulent and growing and turning into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve: then it is necessary that you have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards plug or close the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at its source, and beyond it; and do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the slight movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but it does not help, put the head of the patient in a warm bath; after heating the cautery, shape it like a cane and place it on the tooth; then insert the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and repeat the cautery as desired; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse frequently.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner, the teeth that are moving should be immobilized, and the gums made soft and relaxed, and the moisture corrupt dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the medicines have no effect, then it will be necessary to use cautery according to two methods: cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow and the end in a copper or iron spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent (small cloth), and wet it in boiling butter, and put it on the painful tooth immediately and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the tooth again, and put hot iron on it until the heat comes to the surface of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery combined with fire is such that you take a catheter made of iron or brass and thick enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cauterizer, the shape will come afterwards, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer is cooled; do this frequently because the pain will be removed that day itself or the following.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in haste for this cautery, and then hold their breath; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	"And perform the cautery on whichever head you wish, and according to your ability; and this is the form of the rod:"
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofula is of cold flux and not obedient to medicines, then heat the cautery comb as follows, and have it openings for the smoke to exit from the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess where necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, use a smaller cautery accordingly, and leave it in this way for three days; then put soft cotton soaked in butter until the boil is gone; after cure the area with ointments and liniments until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the collarbone:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When the cold prevails over the channels of the throat, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards make cautery at the root of the neck, but do not proceed to the throat, only slightly burn [the skin].
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards make another cautery at the joint of the neck with the head of the spine, and let the cauterization be called "clavicle" from which we have the shape mentioned before; heal the place as we have said earlier until it is healed.
de la toust	of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and sickness of the worm are due to cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor heat, and the disease is old, you should perform two fire cauterizations on the forcible joints; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, make cautery by pricking the entire cauterization called "point" of which the shape is mentioned above in ear disease; and let the points be up to 30, or more if necessary.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the joint as previously stated, let the cautery be at three places according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make four at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After placing the patient on his back and on his side, press the cavity that is within the thigh with your left hand's fingertips; if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the fire cautery in the shape of two needles as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and the dislocation will be corrected with these four fire cautery tools; it is made with the cautery that has two needles, because the shape of cauterization consists of several cauteries; and the nerves are shaped according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has two needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is cauterized above this, namely the nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery, break it with silk; then make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the large caution rod, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is reconnected, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When there are coldness and much moisture in the stomach which change his complexion, and many catarrhs come to him, and in the usual ways of treatment he does not benefit, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 Afterwards, the third fire cautery is performed beneath the spoon-shaped bone by the amount of a thumb, in total with a sharpened iron, and the second fire cautery is made outside the two costal edges so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and there should be enough space between one and another so they do not join together when they excrete pus; and let the cauteries be so full that they penetrate both parts of the chest, and let the figure of the cauteries be in this manner without alignment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If you intend to use a large fire cautery within the stomach in this manner, and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding on the stomach with the point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize entirely with the cautery called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound, until it heals.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 For the liver, pain comes from cold and moisture and excessive wind, if it is too far removed from its natural composition due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as described in the divisions, but it does not help, so the patient should be made to lie on his back; and three cauteries shall be applied according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, between each cautery there should be the thickness of a thumb; and the cauteries should be long and not pressed too hard with the hand; and only half the fur is to be burned, and the patient should be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, he should lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your will is so, cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are skillful and wise in this art; beware that you do not burn too deeply, for you will scorch the entire body; let it not come to a boil, because the heat is very subtle there, and the skilled one can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When an abscess occurs in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the flesh or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels little pain; but if it is in the membrane, then it causes insane pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment is over, it is necessary that the patient lie on his head; then press firmly at the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a flat ironsmith's hammer.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And burn the fire-cautery as long as the hairs are burned away, and stop at the syphac, when it can be entirely removed; after care according to the treatment of sores until it is healthy; and this cautery should not be used by anyone other than one who has studied medicine for a long time, or these diseases may be caused by others.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can boldly operate, and indeed it seems to me that moving is more advantageous.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that one should perform cauterizations on the pleura using roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and it should be dry and as large and long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize one cautery between the chest and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area below the beard; two cauterizations on the fifth costal cartilage and the sixth, declining slightly; one cautery on the bladder, and one more on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on each side of the bladder, but not the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, instead, be gentle as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And an ancient said that no man uses fire-cautery resembling the razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain subsides, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear or patients dying now, or a fistula that cannot be healed coming.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of mice as we have said in the divisions of care, and it does not help at all, then apply three ways of cautery, which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 The other way to make a cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and remove the pus that is near the mouse, or the sore where the patient's bladder comes from on the left side, and lift the incisions according to the direction of the bladder, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After putting the two inflamed nerves on fire until the boils are pierced from the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus you will have four. If you see, cauterize the entire cautery at three places.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After purging for a long time, it is worth trying the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of hydropisy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cauterization does not work against dropsy, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 If the cure according to the methods we have described in the divisions does not work and has no effect, then you should make four cauteries around the body, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back near the spine, at the worst place; and ensure that the cauteries are close to the affected area.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the fire cautery heal for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; healing would hasten and the two intentions will be combined with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the claw as we have shown before; and for the back it is olive-shaped, according to what was mentioned above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in one who is edematous, and filled with citrine liquid, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger; and lower your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, so as not to burn the citrine liquid excessively; and make the cautery in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the index finger; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and another outside the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a while to heal, so that the water drains out; afterwards cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the swelling of the belly comes from cold and moisture, while the digestive and retentive qualities that are in the stomach and intestine are inhibited, and it cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong symptoms, then do this: make one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before (cautere of the stomach), or cauterize around the belly, in a circular manner; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one subtle cautery at the clavicle, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see excessive moisture and the patient suffering, do a cautery on the elbow, one on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach, near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when aid is available.
de la cure des emorroydes	Treatment of hemorrhoids:
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are founded or multiple, and are old and are of thick, cold, and corrupted humors, and have been cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if you apply cauteries: III on the spine of the back, which is completely displaced from almecdate poc and poc in triangulating, and the cautery should be beneath the buttocks II times; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and you see the face swell, then the face gets a large cautery on the stomach as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cautery nails; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the limb when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut an artery, take the fire-cautery that appears like a razor and then burn it all over the artery you are cutting; leave your hand there so the tip of the cautery comes to the vein opening, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much blood, cauterize each time as we have said; afterwards, treat with healing herbs until they heal completely; and if you cauterize a large area with a large fire-cautery, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	of an unhealed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When a patient cannot endure such large incision or opening, as we shall explain in its place, comes the sickness that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 For any boil that becomes pustular and is filled with impurities and corrupt matter, you must probe it entirely with a delicate test, and be sure to know the extent of the abscess fully.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After heating the cautery that appears like a razor, insert it into the abscess according to the size that the abscess is filled, and continue the cauterization until the body burns and decays, once or twice, depending on the amount of pus needed; be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, nor the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the abscess goes to the body of the bladder or intestine, beware of these organs and do not do anything outside of charnut (a medicinal preparation), and think that it is not perforated; after curing the limb when it is healthy, if the limbs are pierced and matter has been removed for a long time, know that the limbs are healed completely; and if the matter is not removed, know that the limbs are broken, and the bones are corrupted in this way, like one of those we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the flank comes with large swelling and does not take on female form, then it is necessary that you make a cautery over the kidneys from both sides using the cautery claw as we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be 4 cauteries in a line, and they will provide more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder becomes soft and weak from cold or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, each cautery should be as long as a thumb; and make one cautery behind the back, if necessary; and make the cauteries incisions like the shape previously described.
de la marris	of the anus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term ends late; and when they come, then it causes great pain: then you must make four cauteries around the womb, as we have said, or cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauterization be with a hot iron, as we have said.
de la hainche	The pustule
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures flow towards the abscess of the pustule and cause it to move from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the location of the source can be found by sight. If you need to cauterize the patient over the abscess of the pustule at one cautery resembling a circle, with the sign pointing before the place around the abscess as it turns, so that the abscess is within the circle; and let the cauterization be similar to that used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present for you, make 4 large olive-oil cauterizations instead, and let them be as deep as all the others; and heal it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain from the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the hernia bag, it is due to coldness and moisture; the sick are healed with what we have said above in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the sick person from the gross humors using fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 Afterwards, make the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two ways: namely with burning substances, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cautery is according to many ways, one of which is this: you should apply three triangular cauteries together on the boil of the hernia in such a way, with good depth and width, with space between each cauterization as thick as a thumb, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped; sometimes cauterization is done in the middle on top of the hernia's head, for which there are four as in this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, if you cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the haunch, but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire haunch, and all the edges should be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method used in sciatica, when pain persists in the loin and does not reach as far as the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If the pain reaches as far as the thigh and the leg, perform II cauteries at the location where the patient says that the pain is present, and the cautery should be placed 4 fingers above the ankle on the left side; and may it be a cautery knife, and may the coagulating substance of charcoal be applied; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near there, cauterize at the location where they feel the pain 3 or 4 fingers away from the pain point which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a fire cautery using either a knife or circular device, and be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on too long so as not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and not to cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen more who made a fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and they let it fester until the leg was completely swollen, and the toes also, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a stomach solution in which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery in one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise shall say in the cautery of the ankle, as follows, make the iron thus and let it be as thick as a nail of the thumb, or a little less, and be interwoven or interwoven from one to the other at a distance equal to the size of a nut of the fist; and let the interwoven parts be above two fingers, and let them also be like nuts, and have the ankle iron well made; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scalded until it is all red and boils, and then put it on top of the sick man's haunch, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with a fire cautery, and leave it for four days; then make a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards, cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance and not many who use it; but this is a good cautery for those who can bear it, and where it should be applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The instrument for burning medicine is that you make it in the form of a cross within which the edge of the opening should be beveled, and it should be made of iron or steel long enough, and at the top it should have two openings, and between each there should be the size of a thumb's thickness; and they should be overlaid and joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the hot iron tool on the patient lying on one side, and then your hand slightly above the hot iron tool; after that pour the two circles of hot liquid into the opening in the tool which has been heated in the fire pot, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient suffer the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bite or burn heals, take your hand with the instrument and gently lift the scab, then leave it for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the burn is removed; and let it stay for three more days so that pus can drain out; and this will be the final help after the treatment of ointments until it heals.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that stains according to what you have done with the scab, and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it or treated it under the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take lime (alum) and hot charcoal, an equal amount of each, grind them together and put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 Have a small hole pierced so that the tip of a razor can enter; and pour from one pot into another well-sealed pot, and add lime (alum) and charcoal with a sweetener on top until there are two layers of powder over which you have firmly grasped your hand; leave it like this until it cools and solidifies or the pot seals, then take all that has settled, and pour it over charcoal and lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And when it is cooled and administered in the work of various medical procedures and cauteries for other members, as it does a similar job as fire, it is mixed with other medicines that are used to cauterize an ulcer in this manner, such as wax, honey, cardamom, charcoal, and soap, all mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure from which one nobleman was healed of the pain of the hernia and sciatica, and praised it greatly, and said that no other treatment was applied to it, and that it became healthy at once when this treatment was carried out, and he was bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And it is said that you should take fresh green litharge and grind it well with a small amount of fat, and apply it to the hernia, to the thigh and to the leg where the pain occurs, and hold it; leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter or bathe until the body is slightly warmed up, and put him to bed, and the pain will leave completely and it will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such fire cautery, unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take the linen and beat it with old oil, then place it on the furrow between the little toe of the foot and the one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After that, take dry goat's fat and heat it until it becomes charcoal, then put it on the linen and leave it until it turns black; repeat this process again and again until you believe, by your senses, that it has reached the hilt, and that the pain has stopped; and this method of cautery is called "cautere de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from falling or from striking or from excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter, none of these similar causes are worth cauterization, unless it is caused by the influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be bled of fetid pills or similar, and make it on the back where the pain is located, three inches marked with incisions, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cauterization should be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do four cauterizations or four on the cautery called "clavile moien" in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrowed anus when they defecate, and fear; you can find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that appears above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this [object] and wish to cure it, if necessary, use the fire cautery in this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The cautery increases every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 If you wish, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing two or three lines and the tips close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the limb until it is healed according to what we have said, be careful not to apply cautery in a gilbositeit (a swelling or inflammation) that may be in a nerve of the spine.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is from swelling affecting every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and it is caused by coldness and medicine cannot cure it, it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the patient prepare a cautery around the joint of the foot, and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, make the cautery with a point all over.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pain comes to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make the cautery over each knee three or four times on every side with an olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand away from the heat of the coal for too long.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, do point-pricking twice on the fingers; and if there remains no pain at the wrist, do point-pricking above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, give good care to the patient, consider medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give good care and purge him with bile, he will be healed by God's aid.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the vein
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the hernia comes in anguish, and the bulge descends into the groin and this happens suddenly, if you want to treat it, you must not let him eat anything that day; you should use things that relax the abdomen so the stool passes from his stomach. Afterwards have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to cling to his loins as tightly as possible until the bulge has receded, then press it to your sides, and apply pressure on top of the hernia above the joint of the little finger, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle on the chest. Then heat the cautery in the shape that is shown here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and exudes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then pull the muscles to their place; and the assistants hold the patient's limb so it does not return; and work well on the thigh of the patient, put the cushion and the sergeant under him on the thighs, and the other one holds the hands; then place the cautery on the affected area with your entire hand, hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful that the boil does not burst when you perform the cauterization; that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And the cauterizations for children should be subtle according to their size, and for big people also big according to their measurement; after three days heal the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; afterwards heal it with other medicaments until it becomes healthy, and make the patient lie down on his back for forty days while the wound heals well; and it is necessary that his urine is allowed to flow freely, so that the scabs do not appear when he is about to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 After forty days, when he wants to get up, bring him a well-made bedsheet and leave it for forty other days; let him rest well, so that he does not exert himself too much, nor drink too much, eat too much or cough too much; and if he follows these instructions, he will be completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I shall say afterwards the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the cutting into the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When roundworms come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you should perform the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it burn one third of the skin; afterwards, cure it as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pronged cautery in this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first, mark the place where the worm is and make a line above it, and another below, and move your hand all over the three-pronged cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauteries are more delicate and mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cures do not help; then it must be cauterized by the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its nature and location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If the first cauterization is healed, that's good; but if not, start another cauterization on top of it, because it is customary for the cauteries to turn to the member closest to them, so you must make the cauteries as many times as the patient is healed.
de meselerie	When a wound occurs due to cutting or an injury, and pus comes out of it, and the limb surrounding the wound becomes inflamed, then it should be dressed with the medicine called "meselerie," and the dressing should cover the wound entirely, and the dressing should be applied daily until the wound heals.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The disease is sometimes helped by cauterization with great help, and equally the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see if the patient can be cauterized, take care if the disease is at its onset, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and it does not deteriorate or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: Place the head on your lap, the other towards the front to the end of the hair; and [the cautery] above the two horns, and behind on the occipital bone; leave your hand such that the cautery reaches the bone, and such that the scales come out forcefully so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize above the nape according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the swelling is spread out everywhere; it clearly indicates that you must burn with these cauteries which we have said: one on the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and one small one, and two on each shoulder; two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of nerves that are above the ankles, do not burn them; sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the fist, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you do with fire cautery, the more help it provides, and it benefits them; and know that patients feel no pain during cauterization as the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of ironwork.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After treating the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling arises in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then you perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cautery be a little deep into the flesh; then treat it with oil until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes they make a cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the nerve opening that immobilizes the limb, and thus if it is opened the inflammation follows; yet no one should interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the openings of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	When a boil or abscess breaks open and is left to heal on its own without treatment, and it remains swollen, then apply leeches to the affected area according to its size; and let the leeches suck until the swelling goes down. And sometimes leeches are applied to the hand, foot, back, at the opening of the nerve that makes the limb numb, and in this way the boil or abscess is drained; but no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the nerves moving the body.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" appears and the medicine devices do not work, then cauterize it with a deep cautery according to the size of the affected area until the blister is removed and its color changes; then apply a poultice made from barley flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with goose blood and woodpecker blood, of each one part; mix everything together, tie it in a cloth, and place it at the affected site until it becomes healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of scrofula by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil begins and you wish to stop it, cauterize with the circular cautery around the entire circumference of the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 Yet the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the boil; however, this does not seem good to me, because I fear it will ulcerate and corrupt, and I have seen this happen once; rather, it is more proper that it be cauterized around, with the circular cautery as we have said earlier regarding cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	the swelling that cannot grow larger
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which is slow to heal due to its excessiveness or the age of the patient when they are weak (meaning very old) and have little blood, or due to the time it takes; and you see it speed up in healing: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking. Afterwards leave it as is.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 When it speeds up in healing.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery in this manner:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through, and make sure those cauteries are such that the patient feels them so that the course of the pus is unobstructed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the patient has been completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure for fire is with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," which is nothing but an erosion of a limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire dries up wet wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can be treated with fire-cautery, then heat the cauteries little and large, as required for the location or the affected area; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all the corruption and nothing remains of it, all that is corrupt should be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and apply soft butter made with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are removed and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the cumin seed remedy for generating heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 If after three days you see that healthy pus does not appear, it is good; if not, you should repeat the fire cautery on the corruptive lesions.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 This poultice has sometimes been cured with an ague medicine instead of fire cautery; but in any case, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for ague in the division: take it when needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	drops that come to the feet.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It often happens that in the foot there arises a disease called "claw" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing swollen which pierces the flesh.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 This means: Cauterization by fire and cauterization by hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Cauterization by fire is when you heat the cautery like a quill of a pen, and it should be made of good iron to the extent that it can pierce through the nail on all sides, and there should be fine margins around it; afterwards put the whole thing hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes out of the hole in the nail; and leave it like this for three days until it starts to emit pus; then make a plaster of wild herbs boiled with oil, and leave the plaster on it all night, and the nails will shrink and be uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the joint with a soothing ointment until it heals.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if it has been turned out of its place by the body's fluid, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you must apply hot cautery. This is done in this way: take a catheter made of lead or iron, or a rod from a potter's oven, and put it on the nail and the blister, that is to say for removing warts; place the catheter so it surrounds completely, then apply a drop of hot oil, and hold your hand tightly, and press your hand while turning so the edge of the catheter reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot oil passage deeply rooted to the root; and allow the patient to bear the bite of the hot oil for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will uproot itself with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Follow after another, while you are heating all those who are within the body, then cure them with ointments that soothe pain.
li cure dou trembler	the cures for shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or quartan fever, or other illnesses, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one cauterization at the heel, and one on the stomach using the olive cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of putrid boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Occasionally, through the body, baths or pustules appear, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 In the first instance, when they appear, it is necessary to make a fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from mirte wood, where the tip should be dipped in fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or a cauterizing iron.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes the cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear, in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the excesses from which they come are broken, and they become healthy; but it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great flowings of blood from the cut artery at the wound or in the incision of the abscess or the cauterization of the member and similar things; it is a very bad thing to let it out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And although this happens in some cases, hasten to put your finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tight until the blood is stopped from flowing out; then take the olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red; then dip .i., whether large or small depending on the size and location of the wound where the artery is cut, in the oil and place the cautery on that vein while holding your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the wound suddenly jumps when you hold your finger on the vein and the cautery is extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing one after the other until the wound is healed; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and that no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when a vein bursts from an artery, it cannot be well stopped at all, except by one of the four methods we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which can stop blood; and bind and hold it accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever provides tight binding with strips of cloth or places hot things on it, or similar things, will not achieve anything beneficial if the bleeding does not stop.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this does not help and there is no remedy or medicine available, he must place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it wide until the bleeding stops above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but let it be dampened with cold water often so that it becomes very cold, until the bleeding stops and thickens and stops; and make inquiries in advance about the necessary cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and we explain the kinds of cauteries, their causes, instruments, forms, and types; I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way because those things are easier to understand that way.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you to avoid foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 There come those who, with their illness, become weak and die quickly because of the craziness caused by their disease or the greatness of their evil, and these should be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And from these comes one who gives you advice and says "wait, I am cured"; but the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 You should not be too quick to listen to those who come to you with this behavior, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not believe blindly but wisely from those about whom you are certain, and from which you can draw conclusions; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be achieved, and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have divided this chapter into sections, in speaking of each section, just as I have written about the cauteries from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand what you need from that which is before you.
dou chief plein d’aigue	a head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes upon children at birth, and when the head of the child is forcefully constrained; and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this illness in adults, and all those I have seen hastened to death; therefore, it seems worthwhile for me to describe the treatment in some cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant whose head was filled with water, and it swelled daily to the point that it could not support it; and so much moisture accumulated that it seemed he would die, and this moisture is collected below the bone at the siphac, between the skull and the bone. Therefore, when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you must make a large incision over the head; let the size be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out. Here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is larger and the abscess is greater, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the swelling is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the incisions at each end of the abscess opening wide when pressed from within and it does not respond: then you must make four cuts in the middle of the abscess according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after incising, remove all moisture entirely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 And after the incision, strain the linen and powders, then put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; afterwards, loosen it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and allow the swelling to subside, and give the patient dry meat of a moist animal until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look for the size of the abscess and gather the pus; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then take care that you do not cover the artery and make sure there flows blood, so that the patient dies a proper death by bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	diarrhea
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or worse, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery, with which two arteries will be cut.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you cover them, the patient should lean backward; after that, rub the area with a rough linen until the arteries appear, then strangle the patient's neck with the entire length of the linen; look to see if the veins are visible, and the one on each side will be found behind the ears; mark the places where they intersect, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two fingers deep, until the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done along the wide part of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, making a cut similar to two fingers wide across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when a vein is cut, it jumps continually outwards without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the artery does not open on its own, you must measure the space of three fingers, then make an incision to the bone; and the amount of blood that needs to be let out is approximately 6 cubic centimeters, and possibly a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without spreading, the pus from the abscess does not come, then hold the wound closed and bind, and treat with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes and the acute catarrh arrives, due to moisture in the eyes, heat in the temples, old foolishness and similar things; it is treated with methods of medicine but none of it helps; if arteries from the temples are cut and cauterized as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should lie down with his/her hair on the temples and pay attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not easily found except in some cold people; and if it is found, the patient should tighten his/her neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula as shown in the following form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then gently scrape the skin to reach the artery, then pull it up to the pulleys, and carefully separate the tissues that are underneath on both sides; if the artery is thin, turn it at the point of the scissors, then hold the part according to the size of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut open, it cannot move at all by itself in every way.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the 5th vein, up to the 3rd one; and if the artery is large, then you must tie it with a strong double thread of silk, so that pus does not come before the wound closes and there is flowing of blood; then remove the surplus between the 2 ligatures in the same hour itself, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the wound with the cautery cutlass up to the bone, but this is the hard work, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauteries are help for treating moisture: therefore it is of great help to those with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the area with old cotton and place a well-made tourniquet on it; and when you loosen them, they should be cured with dry medicines that produce char, and bandages, until it is healed; and if without cutting the artery as you perform, hasten to cover it with cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze it with your hand so that the area becomes discolored; and if this is not available, place your finger on the area for a long time until it freezes, and rub the area with cold water until it stops, and then squeeze it as necessary; and the hard and more difficult part in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery of 2 parts, but they should be well thickened to keep their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the straw is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two blades, one of a thick gap, and then when you have signed [the wound] for two leagues, and you place the heated iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be spaced apart because it is not glued with this cautery throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the eyes' tears are flowing from the veins that are above the testicle of fire, and medicine does not help in treating them; you see the patient writhing in pain, and his forehead sweating as if with fever; and if they are soft and moist, so that the hairs on the scrotum have fallen out, and the scrotum is burned, scalded by the heat of tears, it requires this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And it was called the "crushed cure" by the ancients; you must do this to the patient who has this disease, shave his hair from the forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one cut should be as deep as necessary, following the slope of the forehead down to the nose, and the other two cuts should be along the eyebrows above the eyelids, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are located above the eyelids; keep your hand away from the continuation of the jaws, and each wound should be the size of three fingers joined together; prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of linen to wick away the blood, then insert the sharp spatula in two parts as shown:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is above the temple to the second incision; and scrape the entire core that is between the two cuts all the way up to the bone, then continue from the mid-incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatulumile (spatula).
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert the tool called "cultellaire" into the first incision. It is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other side, and its shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And strike the bone cutting towards the flesh as needed, and the bone becomes soft towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the midway split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And cut all the veins that descend from the head down to the base of the incision, and then in the midway split do the same on the other side; and then equally press the blood, press firmly for the blood taken; then place a tent made of old cotton in each split, and place damp linen soaked in vinegar, oil and rosewater on top, and make sure no pus comes out; on the third day untie the bandage, and apply a large plantain poultice with cold tea tree oil, and other treatments to heal wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a sharp catarrh comes commonly, and you see the thin and small hairs falling out, and the vision becomes cloudy, and burned paper-like spots; and the hair follicles itch, and when the head hurts with intense pain, and the patient coughs; then know through these symptoms that those materials and that catarrh do not come from anything but many veins, and the remedy for the cure that is there, if it exists, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you command the patient to bend their head back, then make a deep cut along the forehead and another wide one in the upper lip.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 From the temple on the left side to the temple on the right, make an incision up to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves that move when eating; once the bone is exposed, remove all blood with a sponge; then insert cotton between the two sides of the cut and use linen thread; then cover it with dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil and avoid heating the abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until char starts to grow, then treat it with things that promote char growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of turmeric, and make a poultice with them; administer it in these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear stoppage (or ear drops)
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains or animals, or stones or similar objects like iron; seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or something flowing like water and sand and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls in the ear stone (or something else that does not fit into the ear) and does not settle or grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see a stone (or something similar) in the ear, pour some drops of violet oil or camphor oil on it, then apply extraction; and make him sneeze with mustard powder, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and stretch the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often fever comes from this treatment; and if it does not come with the fever, extract it with fine tweezers, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it does not fart through the tweezers, extract it with thin wire of small length; and if it does not through this method, make a cane of wax and push its tip into the ear forcefully or through the ear canal, and stop up that which is around the cane with molten wax so that the wind cannot enter with the cane; then pull it out in the form of farting, for often it farts as we have said; and if it does not fart in this way, take glue of any kind and put it on anything that you find, and place any instrument sharp at the end over it; then put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not fart through any of the things we have said, hasten to open the ear before the abscess comes and spasms; and the method of opening is that you first make the patient sneeze the cephalic head, and draw blood according to the measure of its power, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small opening in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and let the opening be as a moon, so that you come to the stone, then extract it with your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is an abscess that swells, administer drainage; and if it cannot be drained, administer a thin, fine spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 make an incision in that grain (of earwax or stone).
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do that when you think the grains are moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then take them with subtle tweezers and put them in a sucking solution, as we have said, so that the extraction is done correctly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Then in the ear where liquid falls, the patient should use a warm gargle with first-boiled conditions and wipe the ear thoroughly with cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let it lie on that same ear where the liquid is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out due to this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it doesn't jump out due to this, take many pebbles according to the size of your finger and make them warm slightly in fire; then make the patient hold a pebble or cotton wool in their ear, pressing down with another pebble from the other side and striking another pebble on the one in the ear; do not stop striking one pebble against another until the liquid jumps out entirely and it jumps out completely; if you see, take a thread, tie one end of the finger in the ear and heat the other end with fire until the closer end is burned; then repeat this process with other threads until the liquid jumps out entirely, as we have said in the previous section.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of small animals, such as fleas and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, bring about extraction with tweezers; and this is the lightest thing that can be removed from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and the cure does not improve, if you see any worms, remove them with fine tweezers; but if there are none, take this substance's cord:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it must be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Place the thinnest head (of the instrument) into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, then follow immediately with the whole canal; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 If they do not come out (the worms), then stop the canal with cotton as I said in the previous section; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective for the expulsion of worms, and you will find or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this device, here is its form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And silver or tin is to be placed under a small hole, and above a receiver for distillation; and for pressing within the distillation there should be an instrument of tin well made for this purpose. If you wish, take a scraper and wind it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish in the canal, which should be in the ear. Then push the scraper into the cotton, and press gently until the oil is distilled or has risen to the ear. The patient will feel the heat within. The distillation should be heated with fire in the same way as it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective if it were cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear stoppage (or ear drops)
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without ear problems; and this same thing happens in men due to ear wounds or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage sometimes comes suddenly into the ear, if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a small amount of discharge from the ear, which can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it comes in full (meaning the disease), if one cannot see it, is grave in many conditions and when one can see it, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opilation (pustule) apparent, then open it entirely with this spatula of which the form is as follows:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and pointed in front and behind, so that it does not prick the ear; if the opilation is of pus or cartilage from the ear, hold it with subtle tweezers and gently press it until all the pus is expelled.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the opilation is in the ear, take the subtle rasher lightly and heat it a little over fire, then place it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the opilation that gives the patient pain in the ear, make a small opening carefully without injuring the nerves of the ear; then insert a tube according to the width of the hole made, and moist it with the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make this every day until the wound heals, take a linen cloth and soak it in rose oil and powdered vitriol; if you see swelling on the ear, then you must pull out the linen cloth and apply another linen cloth soaked in oil of roses and wax, until the swelling disappears; then heal it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If bleeding comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are either to treat with distillation.
de la char des papieres	of paper pulp
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the remedy that comes in papers for the eyes when they are moist and dry; you should stretch them with tweezers and forceps, then strike their roots with a spatula; afterwards place vitriol powder on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not work without peeling, then cauterize with the subtle cautery of the lentil, and cauterize afterwards after the incision has healed; and many times they heal, yet nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hailstone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Often come in the earwax small things that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and because of this is the disease called "grandine", which is a thick mass of moisture in the upper and lower parts of the paper; the treatment is as follows: watch carefully if the grandine moves from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know; then make an opening of suitable size, then gently scrape each part, take with tweezers and crush.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it with a piece of paper and just prick it a little, it causes no harm to the patient; and if the wound is large, gather it together in a stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not apply force because the ointment restores it soon and annoys the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	"If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and grasp the hail with tweezers and press from both sides; if the paper is pushed away by the incision, do not worry; when the hail is covered, apply salty oil, and care for the affected area until the patient is healed."
de la graisse des eulz	"of the fat of the eyes"
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinach is a grease that is anointed on paper towels above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it greatly irritates their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because their tears flow quickly towards their eyes; therefore they lie down immediately, and sleep on top, and their paper towels are damp beneath their eyelids that the exinach has opened in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel something coming out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of treatment is that the patient should place his head on your clean surface; then take one small linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, then put it over him; press with your hands from both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture using a pointed spatula, but not too large, no larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and cut through the skin to where you see the exinach; and in several positions, the exinach comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take hold of the entire piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand to both sides until it is spread; and make sure not to tear in the incision, that you do not go all the way with the spatula up to the oil, that you do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, lift a little the incision gently until it opens; then pull out as we have said, then moisten gauze in water and oil, and place it on the wound, and hold bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 To such men who crush oilcloth and put it over to corrupt the moisture that is present.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, heal him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the joint becomes abscessed and hot, heal it with plasters softening it until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs from the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper lice are born with hair other than nature's, and they grow, they harm the eyes, and cause illnesses such as customary tears and softening of the paper lice and albugo, which leads to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways of treatment: either by cautery along with fire, or by cold medicine according to what is stated in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by squeezing, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper lice from the oil to your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, push an awl through one filament of it; and cut off the margin of the paper or the hairs growing from these hairs, and pull one filament along the entire length of the paper, and shave it with a razor; then make an incision in the part underneath the paper, under the hairs, covering the whole spatumile, from the large tear to the small; then draw out one filament, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen beneath the paper, then mark upon the paper a figure similar to the mirte leaf, and it is essential that the figure be according to the quantity by which you want to lift the paper as described to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And to those who have need of large quantities of paper according to how the paper is softened; then they place it entirely over the affected area up to two lines that you have marked, and begin from the largest blister until the smallest; and one of the incisions should be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert an onion in one of the two angles of the key, then peel all of it; then bring the two edges together with a stitch of a fine sewing needle, and squeeze out the blood, and fold over the excess thread on the two corners with anything sticky, if you want to do this; and if not, leave the stitch and the thread for three or four days; then heal the wound without a stitch with drying and binding agents, because the paper revives at the edge of the wound and holds it together, but the stitch is rotten (as they say in ancient times), and this is work without fear; and another method is that you sign the paper with a figure like a thistle leaf, as we have described, with three onions cut according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then join those who are above the small spaces equally according to the form below:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure; insert the other thread through the large hole, and the second thread through the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin as you have explained, then close the two edges of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it heals; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments; and sometimes the hair of the paper may be converted: in such a case, you must use what we have said for the incision; but stitching in one place or another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of dogs is as follows: you convert the skin and turn it inside out as I have said, and then make two stitches by art, and two thin threads as long as the skin and the width of the incision; and tie together the two ends with threads; then assemble one on top of the other subtly over what is above the skin of oil, and bind the two stitches from the two parts tightly; leave it like this for some days, and the skin that is tightened will rot and necrotize and fall off, leaving a hole through which it can heal.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it takes a long time, if the wound is deep and strong, then cure it until it heals; and when the wound has been stitched, and the paper is raised, and the hairs cannot be felt; and these are the shapes of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	1. The work (li ovraiges) is such that you take a fine needle, and put on it one thread of silk and fine; then assemble the heads (les chiés) and join them subtly, and let the lengths of threads be a palm long; then prepare another fine silk thread briefly, and join its ends; then place the patient's head in your hand; let the work be done in sunlight so that it is visible, for this work is subtle and minute; then push the needle to the base of the hair adjacent to the natural hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly until you pull it over the natural hair; then remove the hair up to the base, and put the removed hair back into the hole in the paper, if there is any; then remove your hand until the hairs come out entirely from the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the case (la chasse) is treated and the hairs do not come out, you will draw the case to below, along with the thread that you have prepared, until the case comes out through the opening made and you see it through oil vision; then you will draw the case and the thread, close the oil, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, until the hair adheres in its place and the flesh grows over; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair, and let them grow together, until they are elongated and then shave them.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purulence of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease that is called "alecraty" or the purulence comes in the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And occurs suddenly due to a wound or incision, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 The method of work in it is that you cut the suture, disconnect the eyelashes, insert linen threads into it, and tie it until it heals; and you should not use drying or constricting substances in its treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the illness returns worse than the first; but for things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the juice of water or wheat, and linseed boiled, and when it has been reduced to any oil, wrap it in a tent and cure with it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the key to your cure is that you do not allow it to heal in its original form; and this treatment that we have described is not without caution against this disease returning in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the fat that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the procedure for this work is to take a needle with double thread, and stick it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out in two places of the flesh; then place the flesh above the whole needle, and press with a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that's good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the crack, then turn the paper and make two cracks where there is bone inside the paper; and let the heads of the bones be from the ends of the cracks, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure will be like the figure of a letter with the name "Greek"; then remove that cartilage, according to its thickness from the surrounding paper, then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen; then treat it with the medicine we have said for softening and heating, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a crack or incision or cauterization, then you must make a smooth cut beneath the hairs of the paper, as described before; then you should split apart between the two edges of a tent, as I have said; and the work must be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare engines with all their power as they know how to bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is required for the work and various instruments.
dou soudement de la papiere	quickly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this bond occurs in the hand of men in such a way that the paper is stuck together with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to insert the point of a razor beneath the paper, lift it up; and hold it between pliers until you cut the adhesion which is near the spatumile, not too sharp or too deep so as not to cause pain to the patient from the sharp spatumile; and make your incision, by which you scrape the assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal the entire assembly, and salt the oil at times, lift fresh sweet oil, and colyrium; then place a linen tent between the paper and oil, and put above the oil wool moistened abundantly with egg yolk; and after the third day use the colyrium and the healing substances until it heals.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail has two types: one is nervous and resembles a hard horn-like growth, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moist matter that when touched with iron and cooked with pliers, it cannot be removed; and both start from the large root, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places their head on your hand, then you pull out the hairs; take paper in your hand, then bend the nail over with small tweezers, and hold it up; then take a needle, put a horse hair or ox or cattle hair and a strong thread on it; bend the tip of the needle slightly and pierce the nail, poke through the entire needle, tie the nail with a thread and hold it up, then scrape off all the skin surrounding the nail root including silk and wool to the head; then chop the remaining in the root of the nail at the spatula-like tip and the small forces, leaving the natural flesh or nail, so that the incision does not bring forth tears as is usual; sometimes the nail is only set on the onyx, and at the thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft spatulum around it as described in this shape.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatulum does not touch the flesh layer and break it, and that the pulp is not pierced; and after the incision pour some broken oil and ointment made from litargire on it, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with whatever is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter it, this condition of the nail is often treated with medicines; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take a spatula-like tip slightly sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently scrape the nail above, and if you see that it does not lessen at all and the reason is pursued, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litharge and red collyrium powder and boiled, and stop up the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing goes against you in the oil as in an abscess, then let it heal on its own, and first treat the abscess with warm remedies until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the oil greatly, suspend it at the onion, and crush a part of it but not too much, so that tears do not come; then distill into the red collyrium oil made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 When some men's nails grow red and cover the nail bed and stick to the paper and turn towards the back, appearing like a rose bud; and in such cases, the patient places their head on your hand, then you open the nails, and apply all the red flesh that surrounds them to the appropriate uncures with force; then cut the first layer of red flesh, and continue cutting until smooth, ensuring not to prick the oil at the operation; the incision should be made with a spatula as described in the extraction of the nail and small forces used for excising the bone, according to the form shown afterwards in this chapter; when the incision is completed and all the red flesh is removed, apply oil of ointment or you distill red collyrium resembling corrosive medicines, and place cotton with egg white on top, ensuring it is securely covered by a plaster; if anything remains, let the oil rest and cure the abscess with calming agents for the abscess; then return to your operation when it is healed, and do so for every nail that grows red in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in every case, it is necessary that you be cautious of the treatment for each weak part of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not strike your hand in any of these works until you see that this member can bear that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 The red veins covered with oil become visible and their work is apparent to the eye, weakening the oil for all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 First, inspect the oil that is affected by the sebel and ensure it has no other disease than the sebel. Then, as instructed: ask the patient to place their head in your hand, then press those veins all along the length according to your wisdom, and make sure the pressure is subtle, double as shown below:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two times in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then let these veins be handled delicately, and suck out the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that no heat remains but the veins themselves; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red collyrium to cure those who are congealed.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to suck out all of it in that hour, apply a plaster on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and assured of healing, then continue according to this manner as before until it is healed; and this is the form of the treatment:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula from oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The term for "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said earlier, and it is not healed, there is a trap in it that you cut open above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the tools mentioned earlier to reform it; and it is called "sharp head", and it should be made in the form of a pointed chief, and sharpened like a chisel as shown in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the rotten bone part on top, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption is restored; do this once, then restore the bone with medicinal pressure.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the joint is welded and pus appears, and the body of the bone is also welded, and it remains in this state for 40 days without renewing or becoming abscessed, and no bad accident occurs (for it is healthy); but if not, there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to its original state as shown here: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and by hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the fork according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered to the tip as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place the iron on the edge of the bone, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the fork completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the veins if they hold their hand on the nose (if the blood flows out); and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the pus forms and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If all the eyes (meaning openings in a body part, such as wounds or abscesses) are fully opened and there is no need to dislodge anything or lessen it, then you must tie up the patient; next, heal him, apply hot poultices or plasters with iron to help, then apply oil (made of ingredients like acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla); then hold the oil, and apply the poultice on bandages and cloths. The manner of the cloths should be that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and place one on top of another according to the size required by the eyes; then bind them with a tough bandage and repeat the hot poultices and plasters and the oil and the cloths and the bandages until the eyes are healed. If the bandage weakens, you must tighten it more; if the bandage wears off after a day or night, you must remove it and see if the eyes heal over again. If they do, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice, the cloths, the bandages and the oil until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From the breaking of woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the ruptured eyeball, it opens up and fumes like grains of resin, and is frightening to see; then if you cover it, the treatment is such that you push an awl into the root of the affected part all the way to the top, then push another awl where there is a double thread from the limbus; pierce it, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then hold the eye tightly with the double thread and wrap a portion of the eyeball around it, tightening it well, then pull out the awl and put oil-soaked woolen yarn on it abundantly; and leave it until the threads adhere with the eyeball, then treat the oil with comforting substances until the wound heals; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the eyeball itself in a circular bandage of fabric until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a thin spatula that comes from oil, remove the moisture and clean the eyes, then enter immediately; then pull it out when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from an abscess that assembles in the oil, appearing like an ulcer draining pus, but it is not an ulcer; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the abscess come up to your eyes; then it should be lanced, and the pus should not drain and the light should be let in, and let the patient see things as he is used to; and if it does not drain under, know that it is an ulcer, and if the draining of the abscess is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatulum and press it against the corneal membrane I pouch through the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal membrane and the corona, until the bubble appears; and when it is issued, distill in the hot sharp oil mixed with honey or hot water and fenugreek, boiled with honey, then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	oil abscesses
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the resemblance of eyes in the division and what is needed to pierce it; if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit crossed between your hands, away from light because of the sun, and hold the oil tightly; then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or in your right hand if they are on the right side; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eyes are on the left side, or in your left hand if they are on the right side; then put the point of the instrument under the cornea by the thickness of a reed in the white part of the oil at the lower part of the eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" forcefully, and keep your hand pressed until it penetrates the white part of the eye, and feel that "almagda" comes to the empty place; and it is necessary that the measure of the passage of "almagda" be at the full width of the space from the eyelid to the end of the eyebrow; this is the cornea of the oil; you will see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then put the instrument up to where the water is, then press it down a path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If it (the dislocation) aggravates now, the patient sees it (the dislocation) before him and the instrument in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After a little rest and if the dislocation recedes back to its second position, place the force with the instrument, and when it is in deep and does not go further, you shall gently press around your hand, palm to palm; then reapply the oil again from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then put in oil cloth or wool dampened with rose oil and egg, and bind with the oil of the wound.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, place on it a mixture of fine powder with much egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If the gemstone oil cannot enter due to its hardness, since there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must take the tool called "alberit," which is shaped as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And therefore pierce the conjunction only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then put in a little, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare the patient who sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his position until the third day; then untie him in the same dark place, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then return the bandage for seven days; and it should not be done during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but you should reduce it, because the dislocation rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess is about to open, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct it towards the one who soothes an abscess; and when it is soothed, you should close the wound and put gold on it to cover for any number of days, and remain in that dark room ever after.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then, slowly leave the house, one step at a time, and turn to your own affairs; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country people make almagda perciet, so that the juice comes out, but I never saw any such thing on our land, nor have I heard of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And here are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly from arsenic:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of these [should be] of the same subtlety, and the backbone in four angles bent.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh upon the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes, charred abscesses of various types are born, some of which resemble scorpions in appearance; and if there is one such that the char is thickened with pus color, or if it has a soft char of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case, for the soft and unhardened char, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice into those chars, and pull them out; then take what you can hold with the sharp, thin spatula, until you know that the char is entirely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any substance that cannot be covered, open it with all sorts of subtle and light instruments so that nothing remains; and if without your notice, or the abscess swells, aid it as necessary; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize it until the pus dries up and all the charred matter is removed, then pour in oil, vinegar or cool water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it does not open and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is sane; if moisture does not perforate as required, know that there is new char in the bone above, to which the instrument does not come for cutting: then take a thread about half an inch thick, made of our hands, and spaced between each knot by no more than that amount; put the child's head through the thread at its widest part, and pull through while smelling it until it comes out of the nose into the mouth; and many times children do this in school, and it is easy for him who wants to do it; then hold one head coming from the nose with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as we who are holding the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Make sure that you know the procedure for the instrument to purge the head, then draw out the thread, squeeze the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in its place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of the flesh; then put a plaster made of linen on it for several days until it is healed, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines from the head:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or lead, resembling a lamp with an open top, like a funnel, and guide it accordingly; and if you see, make the funnel closed, and let the instrument be filled for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh upon the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often on the head of the neck arises a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large until it is visible to look at; and because of this, you must cut it open at the beginning, and completely remove it, then put in place the fire cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay too long when it becomes large, take care if it is hard, dark colored, insensitive: do not touch it with iron as it is an aggravated abscess, for when it is cut open once, much harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch and not dark colored, you can cover it all, fear the patient and treat the area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and sewn up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when swelling comes in one of these jointed cavities, it is of little use for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, when such a thing happens to someone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then place the two lips together in a stitch, heal it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated from both sides, you must cauterize all the parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring the two lips together in a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood, and pulverized incense; place some plaster on top of the powders, either strong or other plaster adhering, and let it stay until it dries up, then heal with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	To the human hands, it often happens inside the lips there is an abscess hard like grains of wheat, smaller and larger; then you should turn the lips and cut above each tooth, take with forceps and strike in every part; afterwards use leeches after incision of vitriol powder, until the blood stops flowing; then apply the ointment of asafoetida and cure the wound with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	Of the skin around the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, there arises on the gums a type of skin that the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with forceps and strike its root, letting the blood flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders to the area; if the skin returns after the incision and this happens often, cut it again and cauterize; it will not return after being cauterized; these are the shapes of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	The sores (or ulcers)
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes sores are collected at the top of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs which are ugly; and sometimes they are black and yellow and swollen as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must have the patient sit between your hands, with their head in your lap, and remove the sores or scabs that appear, as long as there is nothing remaining; and do the same for the blackness and greenness, and the yellow and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, as long as you have completely removed everything; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to be smoothed, according to the work that shows, because the razor used to remove the teeth from between them has other shapes than the one used to remove them; and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating the tooth for pain, you should delay drawing it out as much as possible, because it must not be done at all; since this is a very high substance and there should be no excuse for razing (or removing) it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is to be treated for drawing (teeth), you must be certain of the tooth to pull.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 "Many times the patient feels pain and thinks it is a toothache, and makes the good tooth bleed; however, the pain does not go away even when the bad one has been removed, as we have experienced with some saints; and when you are certain about the dying tooth, then you must make an incision around the tooth all around. Use a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then twist it with your fingers or fine pliers at the very tip of the tooth, until it is completely loosened, then tighten the pliers; and hold the patient's head in your lap so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 "After extracting the tooth properly so that it breaks off, and if it does not come out freely, take any of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, then shake it back and forth as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, you must fill it with bandages where the holes are; and gently tighten it with tweezers so as not to break it when pulling; it is very important to work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, for returning the tooth will bring more pain to the patient from the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And be careful not to act like the ignorant lords who in haste and recklessness break the chariot, and never bring about what we have stated; but they sometimes cause great illness through the roots which remain or because of the broken chariot as we have often seen; and when the tooth is removed, wash the area with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the area with powdered vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, which mute the teeth at first, should have long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And have large handles so they do not bend when used, and be of good iron, and toothed for holding them firmly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains exposed, you must put soft wool dampened in butter on it for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the limbs are softened, then put the instruments called "algefri", which resemble a forceps; and inside they should be made like a wedge and this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these instruments, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the tool called "althali," meaning pliers, here is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	It should be thick and large so as not to break it, and if the root pops out with these tools, that is good; but if it does not, then help with all the instruments, here are their forms following:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two prongs, here is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other tools that are placed before the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this tool must not break, and know that many tools of teeth are; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the wise masters find their own instrument according to what their work and illness require, because there are various diseases where the ancients did not teach any instruments due to diversity among them; and if it breaks a chariot or another bone, which is possible, then he seeks the tools that are required, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and sturdy to hold the bone tightly, so that it does not slip away, but can be held and removed; and then restore the bone with appropriate medicine; and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then remove everything with this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and the form is ugly, even in young women, you should know if the tooth has not erupted after the milk tooth, and it is not properly aligned, and cannot be filed or trimmed; then extract it. And if it is accompanied with the tooth, take this instrument that is described as being similar to a small beak, made of sharp iron at its tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And press hard and hard for many days due to the tooth's hardness, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small file as shown below:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently but firmly for many days until it loosens slightly; then smooth it at the end with any smoother, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and bites the tongue, you must file off the sharpness so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth fall out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are about to loosen, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot hold down what they eat without it falling out, and you have treated them with medicines that contract; but this does not help; then they should be restrained with a gold thread, because silver threads become green and rot, but gold never changes; and the thread should be medium sized, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to tighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the forceps between the loose ones, if there is one or more, as far as you can see up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering until the part where you started, and hold your hand gently but skillfully, so that it does not move; and tie the knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then put the joint with a wire using pliers, and assemble them, and place it between healthy teeth so that it does not puncture the tongue; and then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the wires break, hold it with another wire; if it stays in place and serves for its entire duration, it is the shape of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the teeth fall out and are put back in place repeatedly as we have said; let no one who is not wise and patient interfere; and sometimes the shape of a tooth made from bone from a cow or other animal is placed where the missing tooth was, and it is held in place as described earlier, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue naturally, or due to an accident from a healed wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold their head still, lift the tongue; then take the nervous ligament and cut it wide enough so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or pain, and it is due to a wound, push an unguent and cut it wide; and make sure the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is underneath; and when you have done this, lift the affected joint with warm water and vinegar, then put a tent of linen under the tongue; and tighten the patient's jaw each night so the joint cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if bleeding occurs, put it on the level with vitriol powder; and if it refuses to stop, cauterize it with the slow-burning cautery (lentiginout), which is good for this; then treat it with another cure until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it of short color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is declining towards blenchor (gangrene), and there is moisture, press the uncine, and cut it with a thin spatula from both sides; and if the wound persists at your treatment, apply vitriol powder until it is drained; then raise cool water or oil, and treat with other medicine until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes boils called "godath" appear inside the throat, which are properly called the two almonds; and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the bleeding; but leave it until it turns black, and then you will cut it open or it will burst by itself; and if it has white color on top and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first check that the abscess pus rests in place and is soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be in alignment, and he opens his mouth wide, and the sergeant takes hold of it between his hands, and presses the tongue down against all the instrument, as follows; and it is made of silver or subtle iron like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And press the tongue down on top of the instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the awl and insert it into the mandible, pulling it up more than you can; and pull anything from the cloths with it, then cover it with the instrument, which has this shape, resembling a fork; even though the neck is curved and one end is close to the other, and they are very sharp, they are made of iron or bone.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron tongs like this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron tongs in such a way: one part is named, and when you have grabbed one of the nuts (or bulbs), grasp the other in the same manner, then heat the wound with hot, sharp, and smooth objects, and if bleeding occurs, continue heating it until the bleeding stops; or scabs from pomegranate peels are cooked, or bay leaves, and similar things to stop the bleeding; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes more abscesses than two nuts grow in the throat, grasp them then equally as well.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treat a woman of an abscess that was inside the throat, to wit, an abscess of small size; and I had closed the throat tightly, so the woman could not exhale through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she lasted for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so high that it had been pushed in through both openings of the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I immediately then, and thrust into one of the openings, then pulled it forcefully, and took out a large piece of bone; then I set another in its place where the wound was located, and opened his mouth and pressed on his tongue; afterwards, I thrust the opening into these abscesses, and cut off a portion of it, and nothing but a little blood came out; and thus the woman's throat was freed, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting this abscess for long time; and the abscess repeatedly closed up, and filled the place that I had opened, until it became quite large; then I tricked him and cauterized inside the throat; thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and God only knows what happened to them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When the arm extends towards the eye and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the swollen abscesses are calmed down, and it is subtle, you must cut it; and if it is round and not long, and it is blood-colored or of a thin color or black, you should make the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said about its size and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument as we have mentioned before; then pierce the anus into the eye, and pull it out, and cut it at the second place that I have mentioned in the incision of the two anuses.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you not cover more than the natural limit of superfluidity, for if you do, it causes harm to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what has been said in the incision of the II amandres, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears to cover (it), then you must use an instrument for the cauterization of the senses to make them fearless.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of the cautery is sharp heat.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient places his head in your hand, and then you press the tongue against the instrument that has been said or in the chapter of cautery, and fix it with sharp hot iron, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has hair in the eye, or oil is applied to it, as with the scoop of a spoon, and the instrument is placed on top of all the medicine over the eye; and the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flows from his mouth into the medicine without reaching the throat and nose; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it swelling and the bite of the medicine is eased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the socket to the cotton, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this repeatedly until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. And if you have to start over with the cauterization of the medicine, begin again, and after the cauterization drain the pus around the eye, using a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and treated with gargling until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective by fumigation rather than cautery; if it is treated by this method, take camphor and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, gather all or some of these in one pot, put them inside, boil them; the pot should be tightly closed with strong clay, and in the pot place one instrument made of hair according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it should be silver or tin, and one of the shoulders pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is poisoned; afterwards it frequently starts again, until the eye dries up, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the abscess heat, for many things happen there; and do not do this except when the abscess heat declines.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this is not present, then take a cane and put an eggshell inside the head of the patient so that his mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and it is good treatment along with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine is stuck in the throat, or some other thing; you must therefore pull out what you can see and press the tongue against the instrument so that you see it move; if it does not open and remains stuck in the throat, the patient must vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it will expel the thing then. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will stick, and you can pull it out. And if it does not come out as we have said, take one instrument made of reed according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And bend the instruments slightly at the head so that they can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, for it may swell up or push the bone in; it is better for the patient to push the instrument, because they will move or adjust what needs to be adjusted; if they push downwards, pull it back evenly along the entire instrument until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the throat's cavity
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the medicine for sores, as I have said in the division, is done through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not work at all, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press the tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the sore, pull it out very carefully, or use fine scissors that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that doesn't work, take a heated iron, put it in the throat of the patient, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And anoint the patient with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the sore feels the water, it will be healed.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, then subdue the patient with asafetida, at the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will certainly fall apart.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And the method of fumigation is that you take the pot or it has charcoal in it, and cover it with a cloth perforated in the middle, and put the head of the instrument inside; then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the snake in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the anus; and the anus will now certainly come out, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient should suffer thirst, and eat salty and hot things and drink nothing; and then it will be necessary for it to come out through this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nasal cavity, when it can be seen, resembles curved pincers for insertion into the throat; and has the appearance of a syringe tip, and is coated with lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many things resembling abscesses are described here following the memories that come afterwards from one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that the one is similar to its appearance, and of that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for those that are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses of the head are different from those on the bottom, and abscesses in fatty tissue are different from those that come at joints; each should have its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 If there are abscesses, one should not pierce them until the swelling has subsided according to its completion; and if there are such as need to be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that come from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when abscesses come near to joints, and it is left until it bursts around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 If the abscess is near the main member and you delay the puncture until it has become ripe, it will harm the main member; if it is near the base, pierce it as soon as possible if it is ripe; do not pierce an abscess without digestion being completed, except for one that is near the base, which cannot be fully brought out and should be drained internally, and a fistula may form and not heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of piercing the abscess that has ripened according to its completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the disappearance of the fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the swelling and opening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you should make sure the piercing is as far from the abscess as possible, and where it has opened; and let the piercing be along the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or near joints, nerves, and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no hair.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that drop (down), according to the same limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in the hard flesh, it is good to let the perforation remain until confirmation of complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will be filled with much pus, and the abscess may harden and deepen further.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that has been pierced in a large part of the body is needed for the limb to be, it should be.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 It is necessary to make small abscesses, small punctures; and large abscesses, large punctures, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where the key should be applied, and covered; when it has become as a cloth, and is softened, it is necessary to do the same as with babies: and if there are those that are cut into three angles, and if there are those where the key is used like myrtle leaves, such as angular abscesses; and if there are those where a round incision is made, and other incisions similar to covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 He who has no head, like a superficial abscess, it must be pierced completely; and when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you pierce it but do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing crooked; do this repeatedly with great care, many times, until the pus is gone; likewise if the patient is weak or a woman carrying, or small children, or elderly people weakened.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The pus sometimes spurts out at times with the drawing out of the abscess, and it may happen that the patient dies unexpectedly, but do not worry about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, be extremely careful with this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, drain the wound, and check if the opening of the abscess is small; and if it is a large abscess, bring threads of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess and there is much damage, it is necessary that you place a thread in each place so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin and shaved around it, fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then open it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it, wet the cloth, and place it on the spot, pressing repeatedly with it.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bleeding persists, apply care and treatment, and the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the affected area or abscess is very sensitive, you must place hot and wet cloths on top of it; but if it is summer, and the affected area is fleshy, you must place cloths moistened with cold water and oil, or cold water and oil, for three days, as we have said before; then open the abscess and drain it, curing it until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This is what you should know universally about the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and now here is the chapter.
des soros	on the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses on the head, there are methods that we know of which are in linen, just as the jester of a pear, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that are fat and swollen like boils; and there are others that are hard and rock-like at the base, and no doubt that the arteries do not oppose them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the procedure of the tail is that you try everything called "incisor", by which the following form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, then they make an incision along its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is drained, they scrape without leaving any hair that contains it, because it will return if left; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, in water and lime, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and corrosive sublimate will help those who remain until morning.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then continue the lint, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know well that it does not remain in place; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the abscess is hard and swollen, cut it open in this shape, longwise; pour out its contents, strip off all the skin from all sides, and apply all your care to draw pus from the cavity where it lies; if the arteries oppose you, do as I have told you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise for an abscess that is hard and full of pus, cut it open and treat as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 Cut open the hard, pus-filled abscess and wet it, for it is easier, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if in any of these abscesses or head there is no moisture, and among these was the abscess that I cut out from an old woman's head; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had pierced it with anything, one would have made a wound like that of a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads coming from children's heads and the roots of ears, they should be opened always at most according to the situation, in order for the pus to drain out; and treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess appears at the neck, under the shoulders, in groin areas, and sometimes it occurs elsewhere on the body, and they are large and connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula is properly within its side, as the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 Some contain moisture, and there are malicious ones which do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the one that you see with good position, and resembles the color of the body, and is silent in all parts and not at the neck nor the artery or duct, and is not deep; then it must be cut through, and peel off each part, and open the two lips of the scar, if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and pull slowly, and be sure not to cover the nerve or vein, and do not use a lancet or sharp instrument that may slip, and look carefully, so you do not cover what should not be covered.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you open the vein or artery and it does not yield, place vitriol powder in the wound, or any powders that stop blood; hold the wound closed; let it remain until the abscess is appeased and the wound softens and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 When the pus has stopped flowing, return to your work until you finish it; then look for your indication if there remain small scrofulas; if so, cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 If there is a vein running from the root of the scrofulas, do not cut that scrofulas at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang down, without causing harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you excise the entire scrofula, you must close the two lips of the wound and sew it now because there will be no delay due to excessiveness for the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 Then you must understand to cover the root of it, drain pus, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas with excessive material, pierce there where it is most open; and pierce as the one before said, descending, then introduce probes with ointment and similar things, so that it destroys what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment made of char, until it is healed.
de squinance	In this case, "de squinance" appears to be a misspelling or variant of the term "d'escroquance," which means "from squeezing." Here is the corrected line:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke about the size of the throat, but I never saw it done in our land and it is written according to their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the throat slit called "epiglote" should be cut open; and no aid should be given by these, because all the veins and the spur of the disease are at those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the spur, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 It is necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it under three circles or four small cuts across, between two circles or by the amount of the cut depending on the thickness of the epiglottis; not in the cartilage; and such lesions are suitable for sectioning the epiglottis as there should be no cartilage. And the vessels are long enough for this.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 If the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat all along, then cuts open the cervical vertebra until reaching the chin; and cuts off the vessels of blood if you see anything, and then breaks the cartilage as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe which bursts through the broken neck and the lack of voice; leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed where doubt of strangulation exists, bring together the two lips of the wound and sew it closed with care, then apply medications that cause pus to form until it heals.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the wings are cut off.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then press on the throat because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and it prevents death in this way; and for this reason, the old ones commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease passes, and it passes within three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it is cured; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 A young girl took the knife and stuck it in her throat, piercing part of the windpipe; and I was summoned to treat her, and found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and saw the blood coming out of it, and I knew that it had not opened or led to any vein other than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and treated her until it was healed; and nothing more happened to the girl except that she regained her voice, and returned to her position; therefore I say, in such a situation of the windpipe do not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat   (The word 'gorge' can also mean 'throat' or 'neck', but here it refers to 'large throat' as a translation of 'la tailleure de l’epiglotte'. In modern French, 'tailleure' would not be used this way.)
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and is a large abscess in color like a grape, and it is more common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; where natural has no instrument.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental type has two ways, where one is similar to a fatty tumor, and the other is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; there should be caution, and it is not advisable to perform strong measures except in small ones, and prove and search through the whole opening: if you find it similar to fat, and it does not open at all, strike it as one strikes a tumor, and pull it completely out if there is any; and seal it tightly, and cure it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways of ours are, which I shall explain all their similarities; and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference between a notch and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Issue is heat and sustained fever while the inflammation has passed, and the swelling is complete; then the fever subsides and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With a notch there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains the pus which is its own sac and corresponds to the color of the body, and begins like an abscess, and becomes large; and they are similar in two ways, whether fatty or moist, and very much colored as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the nose, you must first test and examine all the instruments called "introscope", according to their shape that appears in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 The method of inquising the abscesses in us is that you take a more moist place than you find in the abscess and turn your fingers bit by bit until you know that the straw has pierced the core; then, according to the size of the abscess; extract the pus-holder, and pay attention that it does not burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs from the abscess, let it drain as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the opening no more moisture comes out, know that it is filled with pus, then make a cross incision, take hold of it with forceps, and gently scrape it lightly on each side and pull out the rotten part where you can pull it out safely without damage; and if you cannot pull it out safely, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains, it returns several times; and if a small amount remains, which does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound closed, and place warm soothing substances on the abscess, and cure it with other treatments until it heals; and if it is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and heal what causes pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or something else, and you are forced to act quickly, use vitriol powder, and let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound heals, and let the swelling of the blood subside; then cover again what has remained unhealed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Look at the shapes of the probing instruments, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small; there are also three cross-shaped ones called "albarets", and one called "breb", and they come in three sizes as well: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses with fistulae; and they are like needles used for sewing witches, and are made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and the yellow ones are more valuable, and are more experienced at penetrating black corbures of fistulae; and they come in three types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of the ankles are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and some ankles have two bends in three ways; and some ankles have three bends, also in three ways; and some ankles have two bends, and ankles with only one bend, all of which are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these [anatomical parts] from which one makes an incision are sharp, and there are those who do not cut at all except from one side, so that the vein or nerve is not severed; and these intromissions [tubes] are responded with plugs, so that the patient does not perceive it at the opening of abscesses; and they are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and one does not use it except in charnut [cartilage], such as legs, arms, breasts, groins, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another tool smaller, resembling fistulae stitches, according to this form, to stop the blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed sometimes at the place that bleeds from the veins and arteries, and sometimes it is reapplied in this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they resemble women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them should do so according to this form of this line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then, cut away the fat, apply medicine-soaked linen to the wound, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed; if the breast tilts downward and becomes enlarged like women's breasts as it happens, tie them up in two crossbars above, by two similar cuts; so that one is held by the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g; then cut away the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and bring what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever else is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until it digests the remaining fat, and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses in the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole boil that is in the abscess is emptied, apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and dress it with ointment as needed until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions as we have said in the treatment of scrofula; and if the wound becomes boil-like again, bring fire as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	The rupture of the artery.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is injured and the skin above it becomes stuck, there are often abscesses, and this also happens with an inflamed vein and abscess; and when one recognizes this by the artery, the abscess grows long; and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels tight; and when it is due to the vein, it swells outwards; and it is foolish to cut such an abscess, especially when it is below the joints and angles, near the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, it is necessary to remove the iron cure and also the one who is at the head should be removed, and in the one swollen with an artery, make an incision through the skin on top; then open the abdomen evenly, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed; then place a needle beneath it, and pierce it up to the opposite side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then press the area between the two ligaments with an intromissoire until the pulsation stops and the abscess is drained; then apply the curing bow to it, until the ligament cries out; then treat it with dressing as appropriate, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to a vein wound, you should stain your hand with it from the abscess to all the skin, then place the needle beneath the area that you hold in your hand, pierce it and have a double thread, so that you draw it from the opposite side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or the ligament of one of the two parts with two threads; and if you doubt that the threads will not pass, push another needle through all the thread beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in four places; then press the abscess so that the excess is expelled, then press the excess of the wound and leave what is tied; then apply a damp cloth in wine and oil, then treat it with tent and ointment until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	from the black abscesses
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses appear in black areas when they are wounded, or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this often happens in the shoulder and the thigh and in all places where there are joints, and it is called an abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it is found in various positions with pain; and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, but it is not entirely in the body, but beneath the skin; and it can be felt all over, and it does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and one who is in joints should not be covered by iron: perhaps contraction would occur; and one who is on the head or forehead, apply the cup to it.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and press its base; if it is large, hold it at the edge, peel it off, then cut open the wound and sew up the incision until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Large swellings hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge", resembling mushrooms, with subtle roots and large heads; some are small and others very large; I have seen men who had two or more bellies that resembled mushrooms rather than anything else, without any difference, and were white, had thin roots, were cut open, and immediately became wet.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I weighed them and found one at eighteen ounces, the other six pounds, and in the incision it is such that if you look, the patient is wet and the color of the intestine is white and moist with a thin root; if you cut it open with a broad spatula, then have the fire cautery ready.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in the thigh there often comes excessive bleeding, and if it overwhelms you, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the thread until it stops the bleeding, and press through it; if the roots are large, be careful when pressing because of the stomach, but you can well press half of it, then cauterize to prevent it from returning; then heal the wound, and be sure not to cauterize the thread which is of foul color and poor sensation and milk-colored gaze.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to the treatment of scabies later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the thigh is pierced
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of an abscess comes from cautery of a wound or a fissure in the stomach, and it is above the belly and one of the boils, as happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries, according to what is before, or from ventosity; and if it is through the route of the stomach and from the exit of the stool, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing with little pain, and open with diverse discharge.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestine rupturing, then it is more varied; and when pressure is applied to it with hands, it rebounds, and then returns, and possibly swells, and greatly increases at the entrance of the wound and by heavy labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and open when pressed with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and filled according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to ventosity, it is soft to touch, and the operations are that you look to see whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery or vein, or ventosity.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 You must let the treatment be.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, about the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is of the intestine or the belly, you must instruct the patient to bend his knee, and be extended straight, then stretch the intestines all around the belly; then command him to strain gently between your hands, then go around the area that you have stretched with a spatula, then cut half of the abscess with a large spoon; then tie it with a strong thread or cord firmly, and make the two ends meet; then open the stretched half of the abscess over the thread, and stick your finger inside, and search for the intestines; if you find it caught by the thread, release it, and push the intestines to the opposite side of the stomach; and if you find a belly, take the spoon, and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein opposes you, go cautiously, then return to your work and take two needles with thick threads, and stick them next to what you have made an incision; then hold the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the area as it is, and let the dead flesh rot by itself; or cut when it becomes soft and can be pushed, then cure the area as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said; and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the area.
dou chancre	The translation is "on a boil" or "a boil".
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the resemblances of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how to avoid the cure of iron; and we say that chancre originates in the marriage, and great caution is required in its cure, and the ancients stated that when chancres are in a place where it can be shaved like chancre that is on the genitals, and in the thigh, and in similar places, it should all be removed when it first appears; and when it is large and old, it is not advisable to approach it, for I never knew anyone to heal it; no one ever healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him sweat if there is manifest repletion, then shave the patient.i. one good place to perform the operation; then pour boiling oil or vinegar over the place where the operation will be performed; then press your thumbs or an instrument onto the chancre, and remove all of it without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely, and be careful not to prevent the bleeding by cutting into an artery or a vein, if that happens, cauterize until the bleeding stops; then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of hydropisy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division the resemblances of edema, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only revealed; and one should not touch iron in these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and ypsarche, for it is a fatal thing; therefore, when you treat this resemblance of edema called "edematous effusion", if the cure with medicines does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if he has another disease other than edema, such as dropsy and similar things; in that case, do not touch iron, for there is doubt; but if you see the patient of strong constitution and he has only edema and he is not too young nor too old, you should proceed thus: lay the patient straight on your hands, and the minister presses the abdomen pushing the water to the lowest part of the bladder; then take the curved spoon according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut through by two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And let it be pierced by no more than two fingers' depth, and it should not be bled; then check if the urine is directed towards the intestines: if it is directed due to disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the third rib; and if it is due to obstruction, then on the right, but do not let the patient lie on the incision lest the excess fluids flow to that weak place; then cut through all the skin with the tool, pull it back, and press your hand all around the bladder as when scouring at the amount of a nail or thereabouts; then pierce the bladder until the hand comes up to the depth of eight fingers, and this is the bladder's neck, then draw it out, and place the instrument in the form shown:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a silver needle, thin and made of thread or light wire, and has a hollow part at its small end; and where it touches one side, there are three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head of the needle is cut like a feather quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve into a pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Above the anus is the urethra, so when the instrument approaches water, you should now move it upward on the instrument; empty then either half or one-third of it, because if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will fall faint, or approach death; but empty according to its potency and according to what the conditions of the patient's health and his pulse indicate; then draw the instrument out and retain the water, and it is now held back by the cauterization that stops the flow from the bladder, as I mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small amount of water out; do this every day and take care not to let it last too long but only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt about the patient, and leave him in water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and much sweat or bath, and anoint with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Stopping (or treating) the member (or penis).
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary to make a very fine incision everywhere on the spittle like this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 then place the small, fine incision in the spittle with wood, and hold it and keep it for 3 or 4 days until he wants to urinate, if it is removed, let him urinate, and then replace it; and possibly there should be no need because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 The patient with a small ulcer, is to be treated with the cupping glass filled with water, as we have said, it will open up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those without an ulcer in its place are bled, for no one is born who has the ulcer at the tip of the penis, hence they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and they cannot perform intercourse due to this because the matter cannot reach the opening, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of work is that the patient lies on their back with the head of the penis and the buttocks aligned as the tail of a feather, so that the sore opens in the middle, as necessary; and you should beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, you should stop the bleeding by applying pressure to the bleeding area and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	genital ulcers
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this albathe comes in the penis, and it is an appearance of a bad genital condition; and there are both harmful and harmless ones; you must take them one time with very subtle hands, crush and clean all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top, and cure it with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of pus-colored and swollen, then you must bring fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cauterized it, and if the ulcer is along the penis, and has both parts inside the skin and outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is within; and when it is sealed, heal the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you are treating it (the patient), do not be certain that the testicles will not be pierced; blackness and corruption come into its sheath and scrotum; therefore, all that is black and corrupted must be cut off, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which should be made from the peel of pomegranates and walnuts, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 If bleeding occurs, bring the moon-shaped cautery in this manner:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery is prepared in this way: namely, for the removal of blood and corruption; and if the testicles of the penis are corrupted and retracted, you must bring or lead out a sheath made from yew wood, and make the patient urinate through it; and when the hair is spread at the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to an injury or abscess, therefore, you must shave the area with a sharp instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the testicles are released from the penis on all sides; and if this is difficult to say, then you must shave it with a sharp tool a little below the head of the penis and pubic hair; then press gently between them, and put a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water underneath, which should not be removed immediately.
de la circoncision	When performing circumcision, first cleanse the member completely with warm water; then take a sharp knife and cut off the foreskin, leaving a little skin at the bottom.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not without its complications, like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own free will and for infants, it is necessary that we do the best job possible and make it as easy as possible for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	I wanted the greater part of the masters and sages who performed circumcision to have at least one dagger, and with force, and in all one novacula; but the cowardly ones fled because there are two layers, and by chance if he strikes the upper one and delays the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then it is covered and the pain is doubled, and at the mundification which is done with a dagger, the tip of the member is not secure; and in the mundification of the nail, by chance the iron escapes and spoils the work, and many times are born like that which do not need mundification and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Regarding the amputation that is made to all the links of the chain, I have found the advantage in the experiment, because the forces cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, make an equal cut all the way through; but let the thread be well straightened around the skin; and the procedure is the same as before, so that you make the child understand, if he can, not to tie the thread anywhere else except around the rod alone, and then release it in all possible ways; then make him place it upright between your hands, and bring back the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any tool; then push your hand against the rod and blow or suck, and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it very well of the filth that has accumulated there; then tie a double thread around the fracture site; then tie another thread around the other end of the first one; and hold them both by the second knot at the wrist and the finger, and break between the two threads; then quickly untie the knot above and pull the head of the rod out; then let the pus flow out and out, for this is the purge; and put powder on it and powder that glues well with a little cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil, and leave it like that until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The forms of the forces for the healing are as follows: the two cheeks should be tender and thin, and the cheeks should also be as wide as the hand equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the healing is when the kernels are at incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, so that the lesion becomes an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days and what is beneath the scrotum is swollen, leave it until the abscesses have subsided and gently scrape it; if it bursts as you can move it, be careful of the part of the scrotum, this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the affected area with powder on a shallow wound as we have said about treating powders, and if it bursts excessively and goes above, this will not harm anything; heal it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to a stone, or blood congealed, or pus, or frozen water, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not expelled, and you see it is retained by the stone which is lodged or neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent on their knees; and they should put their feet on the back, and extend their abdomen from the upper part above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and then it is forced the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine is expelled; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called "siringue", of which this is its form: it should be made of fine, light silver pipe, like a bird's feather; and the tube should be one and a half palm long, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, tie one end to the top of a cotton or wool plug, and insert the plug with the thread inside the syringe; then tie off the excess thread and insert it to the top of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and put egg white on the urethra and bladder; then gently place the patient on the seat, and anoint the urethra and bladder with oil moistened with warm water; then carefully insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of the bladder, then bend the urethra upwards towards the belly; then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and make the patient feel the urine filling the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless the conduit through which it goes is twisted; then tie the thread to the entire plug and the urine follows the thread, then remove the thread, and straighten the urine; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	The diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is assembled there, and you see it distill acids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydra", and its shape is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and has three openings: two of them and one in the middle, as you see; and the medicines are inserted into the middle opening so that the medicine reaches the verge without addition, if it can draw out the moisture, and push as needed; and when you want to throw your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw out while withdrawing; if you draw out the moisture with the catheter, then forcefully push back the catheter within; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of a subtle enema used to administer an enema to the bladder. This is it:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher; beneath it lies the ribs or the liver; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture which you wish to use for clysterizing the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts using a strong thread; heat the moist substance on fire; then insert the head of the clisterer into the penis, then hold your hand above the bladder over all the moist substance until the patient feels that the moist substance has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, puncture it roundly; then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like a pouch and put in what you wish of oil and moisture and water, seal it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moist substance reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone and its extraction with medicines; and I have said the difference between the embedded stone in the intestine, and all the signs, and when you should work on a stone of size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often with children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it opens the urinary orifice, it inflames the patient's penis, it pricks it many times, then binds it; and the jumping of these stones often causes foundation problems; and the healing of children is light until they are 4 years old, and it is severe in adults, and it is most moderate for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes blocks the opening of a wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then grasp the patient by the feet, bend them back and move them under, so that the stone descends into the bladder and does not go too high; then make him sit between your hands arranged, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards; then press and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the cavity, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall when touched all over, you should moisten your right hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or use soap, if the patient is an adult; and push on its base, press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press downwards with your finger, and push it out towards the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch out his right hand above, and remove the skin that is under the bladder in the part where you make the incision; then push the spatula covering it, so it takes its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And they make an incision between the coccyx and the base, not in the middle but along the left side of the lower back; and it should be straight across the bone, and your fingers should be either at the base or the coccyx, and the opening should be large enough to pass through easily, yet narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large; in case the fingers which are at the base press on the stone, causing it to jump out without effort; and be aware that there is this kind of stone or stones with angles and corners: it is necessary to extract them. And if it is soft, resembling a plum pit with a round opening through which the stone passes easily.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 Then, if there are corners and edges, make the opening larger; and if it does not come out, you must pull up on pliers that resemble a file at the top to extract the stone so it does not escape; or push down on the instrument with a subtle curve at the top; and if you cannot trick it out like this, widen the wound slightly and remove the stones with vinegar; and if there are more than one stone, take out the largest first from the bladder's neck, then strike downwards, pull it out, and remove the smaller ones afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, then it must be made larger, and a bigger incision should be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For the patient, there are two things: either he dies or urine comes out due to a leak that the wound cannot heal; however, you must try to drain it or break it with pliers, until you remove it piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, apply incense, aloe, and dragon's blood to the wound and hold it closed, and put on a damp cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in oil and cold rosewater, to cool down the abscess heat; then make the patient lie on his neck, and do not undo the bindings until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you loosen it, rinse well the area with oil and water, then apply healing ointments such as diaphanicon and basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if an abscess swells up in the wound and corruption, and congealing of blood in the bladder occurs, which keeps urine from passing freely: then press your finger into the wound, and drain that blood; for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause pain. Then clean the wound thoroughly with water, soap, and linen, and aid it in all ways you know until it heals; and it is necessary that all the herbs you use on it, you bind the patient's thighs together, and apply the medicine to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the wound is small and closed from the penis, pierced and filled with urine that cannot pass, cure it in this way: you will make many incisions and excuse yourself for the cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a metal probe of this shape and sharp at four angles pierced into one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take the thread and tie it around the stone's shaft so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the awl gently into the shaft; then turn the awl towards your hand in the stone bit by bit, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken and jumps out with the urine, the patient is healed; but if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, untie the string, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from a woman's stone (ovary)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens rarely that a stone is in the womb of women, and if it ever happens, it is a great grief for the cure, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is because one cannot find a woman skilled enough who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of a woman is deeper than that of a man, which requires a more profound incision, and great fear is present. If it is necessary, then you must take a midwife who knows well, and if she cannot be found, then cast your subtle eye [to find one]; and present a wise woman in the affairs of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to make the incision of the stone; and observe very well if the woman is a virgin: Then you must press her shoulder or lower abdomen and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it under her shoulder, and command her to press her shoulder or press on the sick woman's abdomen, and press with her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is dislocated, it must be moved gently from the entrance of the bladder until below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike on the bone in the root of the thigh near the middle of the hip, where the bone is movable and can be felt; do not move your finger over the bone or under, and cut it slightly at first; then push the buttocks into the thigh, if you feel the bone protruding so that the bone can be brought out, and know that there are many types of bones: for example, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with rings.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 know the characteristics to know the solution.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the bone breaks out, place vitriol powder broken into it and hold for an hour until the bone stops bleeding; then return to your work, as long as the pain persists, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone for men to help you in your work; and if the bone breaks out again, and it is from the artery that is cut, place powder on the area and press with bandages and do not resume the work anymore, and leave the pain and do not pull it, lest the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is alleviated and the wounds are healed, return to your work until the pain subsides.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A hernia aquosa is nothing but an accumulation of moisture or white matter, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called a "white matter," and sometimes it is specifically in the egg's lining, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the bladder between the white matter we have mentioned; and this does not occur without pain.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and it spreads out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes it comes from percussion on the skull, and this moisture may have several colors: either it is declining to yellow, or without red, black, or watery white, and this happens more often; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, it is an abscess, round like an egg, and do not open the skull, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the very fabric (of the abscess), the abscesses are recognized as being of one type with a part of the egg, and because of this it is thought to be another kind; but if the moisture is between the skin and the yellow pus, it can easily be felt; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe all around with the instrument, from which its form can be seen.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows the intruder, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat (it) with iron, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body; then lie him on his back, on something slightly elevated, and place a lot of cloths underneath him; then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to stand on the right, and extend the arm towards one of the two shoulders nearest the neck; then take the spatula (or lancet), and pierce the skin between them along its length until you reach the point where the pus is yellow, and strip off the skin gently according to your ability; then open the pus pouch completely with a deep incision, and remove all the pus, and then put on the onions (or dressings), and cover it up; but do not touch the neck, only the pus; pierce the whole length of the arm carefully so that if you do not do it properly, the pus will return; and if the egg bursts in your work, collect it back into its place when you have completed the operation on the abscess; then bring together the two shoulders near the neck to a stitch, then treat the wound as other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted with another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood; afterwards strike the coccyx to the whole suspension, and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if an abscess has assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; when the other part is pressed like you have done the first equally, then draw out the blood, and put moist linen in oil of roses into the wound; and put another moist linen in wine and oil on it, and put the two pieces on, and put over it double fabrics, and tie it all with a string according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two fabrics and employ them with moist linen according to this appearance and sew them together into the girdle of the armpits, and one of the branches take above the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the handle; and the other two branches on the two angles, and let it all be held in the loop of the bandage; and sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of a knife blade, and you should take the pointed cautery, touch the skin of the coins, and let it become hot as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the abscess is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, pierce the white pus with onions, and scrape it off with this hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cup in all ways that you can, while you are heating it; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salubrious; and be mindful of the decorum of blood, and be careful about the operations of cutting; and if anything opposes you, either an abscess or decorum of blood or something else, then cure whatever opposes you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 If the patient is afraid and does not wish to undergo this operation due to its frightfulness, you should perform perforation as I have told you, and know that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that a discharge of pus has occurred at the location, then have the patient sit on an elevated seat; then perforate the abscess in the area beneath the thumb-sized space, and place the perforation along the length of the body; make the wounds wide so that all the pus can flow out; then put cotton on the site, tie it up, and allow the remaining pus to drain out until the wound is healed; and if the white linen cloth does not let the pus exit from the opening of the wound, you must insert a feather or the instrument for draining pus from dropsy, as its form has been described before; stretch open the wound, know that the pus will return, and in about six months or thereabouts it will be assembled, and when it is assembled as before, the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of an abscess of the eyes
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the incision of this vein, fear arises in many positions, so it seems to me that one should leave it alone; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, including the eyes; and it is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is by excessive sour and acute liquid spreading in the joints, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; there is no pain found, but it is a severe abscess; and sometimes an abscess swells fearfully and pus-filled, with such color, and occasionally comes from an artery, or from an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from an artery, it can be known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your hands; and it should not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 One who is made swollen by the vein is known by his disposition to the expression of touch upon the thumbs, and can well perform the surgery on this likeness, and on other members; and it is that you strike the core of the bones, then the egg is above, and the thread goes straight through white substance, and releases the suspensory from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the egg is already softened with these swellings born, then it is necessary that you pull out the egg and strike it; and if it is toward the white substance, or within the vessels, it is necessary that you release all of that tender part and strike it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the membrane is to one side, you must break it all and draw out the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of an abscess of the eyes
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enveloped by an envelope resembling a boil, with the softening of the bones, and the patient groans greatly as he goes; and the cure for this disease is cautious as fearful as that described above, and nevertheless we will tell you the work on it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated chair, then push the suspension belt of the loins downwards towards your hands, to all the straps close to the penis, and tie them tightly; then cut with a sharp spatula wide enough to expose the veins, and then skin each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a double-threaded needle where blood comes out, and tie it at the first place where the blood vessel is visible, and tie it straight to the other end; then pierce them evenly along the length of the body, and remove all corrupt humors; then treat the wound as you would a swollen bowel, so that no vein bursts that nourishes one of the loins; because there will be no harm, and if all the veins burst, it is necessary to extract the loins at all the veins; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the veins, and dry up and cannot help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the vein
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The occurrences of this condition are due to the opening or extension in the abdomen, specifically in the area of the intestines, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the openings; and this rupture is either the syphac or the extension of it, and these two types of occurrence have multiple causes: either due to impact, jump, strain, lifting of heavy loads, and similar things; and the signs when it's about the syphac extension are that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up until near the full extent, because the syphac pursues the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of a section through the stomach, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously beneath the skin close to it, and this is due to the outflow of the intestine and the body cavity through the stomach.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	Sometimes the intestines are expelled through the anus and remain blocked, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, due to fear, it is necessary to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	1. The manner of the work is that you command the patient to push their intestine back into place within the wound if it can be reached; then hold the neck in your hands, bring the thighs together, raise the bones above, and crush all the skin of the joints with long forceps; then insert thumb-sized instruments according to what is needed to open the wound, making sure that the eyes can emerge; then excise the diseased tissue beneath the skin of the joints until the white diseased tissue is exposed on all sides; then place your index finger in the position behind the joint, in the area between the white diseased tissue beneath the skin of the egg and the second layer of diseased tissue, and separate that which is behind the egg and the second layer of diseased tissue; then move the joint manually with your right hand, while keeping the white diseased tissue on top to the left side, and push the egg towards the abdomen; command the assistant to stretch the egg upward and dislocate what is attached at the back; check if there are any intestines involved or hardened white tissue, and if so, place it in the abdomen; take a large needle with thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it into the rear part of the diseased tissue, which is after the skin of the joints; after the abdomen, crush the bones that appear to be of filament size, until there are 4 filaments; then arrange them one above the other in a cross shape, and tie the diseased tissue, as we have said, beneath the skin of the joints, with a strong ligature of 2 parts; then wrap the filaments in thread, and tie them together to form 2 parts, so that no vassals who nurse it can enter; attach the ligature according to the first ligature length, 2 fingers beyond the diseased tissue beneath the skin of the joints, and after these 2 ligatures leave the remaining diseased tissue beneath the joint capsule in a large piece, about the size of a thumb; then crush in the area that is under the joint capsule, until it becomes soft and rounded, as we have said earlier; then apply moistened linen cloths to the wounds, and attach the ligature that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white sores that I have mentioned are cauterized after incision due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens: leave the ligament until it chooses to slip off; and if it delays in slipping, it should be stimulated with warm water, and place what has been said above on it until it slips; then cure the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a splint joining the bone, in this manner you tie the ligaments lightly above them on the underside; then break it, and treat the abscess of those who work on it until the ligaments slip; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Sometimes it comes to rupture in the anus, as we have said, and open the ligaments; and do not remove any intestines from the anus, and if some are removed, it is a mistake, and repair it every hour; and although it stays too long in this place, the wound or suppuration may occur until the intestines are removed; and this happens by the spreading of suppuration which is in the anus, as we have said, because it is spread out, then it is softened and swollen ligaments and opened; and the cure is done by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then break the swollen ligament of the rupture at a width corresponding to three fingers; and then pull out the suppuration which is under the skin that surrounds it, then take the right hand and place it over the visible suppuration; and press deeply into the abdomen, then bring the two visible parts of the suppuration near the head of the right hand, and close one and the other; then pull out the head of the right hand, but do not cover the suppuration or extend the egg nor anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestinal splint; then treat it with the wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads (sutures), if they break and heal the wound, let it be healed (or until it is healed).
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The leech is confined and has no appearance in the wound, and the cautery is heated up in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the heels
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the heels becomes soft in some men, because the fat inside is softened and can be seen; when it is observed that it needs to be cured, one should make the patient lie on their back, and cut the softened skin above the natural skin; then assemble two lips together for a stitch, and if you see, sew the excess skin of the softened area with 2 or 4 firm stitches; then cut between the stitches, and heal as other wounds do, until it is healed, and cut the threads.
dou chastrement	The torture
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 It is known that castrations are done according to our law, and for this reason I will not talk about it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: the first is that a person who is castrated responds when asked, and its cure is known; and the second, because we often have need of castrating certain animals to help us, such as bulls, sheep, pigs, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Therefore, I say that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision (cutting).
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In that which we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the joints are softened and boiled; then take hold of it with your hand, until it is set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 From the method of cutting: it is necessary that you dye the beast, and press the hide of the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspension, and strike on each side as much as needed to well skin them; and let no little or subtle fat remain on the veins; and this method of chastisement is better than the one made by attraction because the attraction may happen to leave something from the joints, which makes the beast want pleasure; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism is of two kinds among humans: one kind is when there is an opening between the two genitals as in the figure of the female nature, who has hair, and sometimes urinates in court.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other kind is in women, with a projection like a phallus and two genitals.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 The treatment of men and women is that you shave all the hairs around them (the genitals), and treat them as other wounds; in the second kind (of hermaphroditism), from males whose urine squirts through the skin of the genitals, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	The disease or illness:
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 A hairy growth on the natural part (of the body) is called tentigene, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have as much of it as a hand, and this is treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary that you stain the excess of the tendon at your hand or fingers with onions and lightly scrape it; and do not go too deep, so that blood does not come out; then treat it with another remedy until it heals; and to another sore that arises from the mouth of the ulcer, and the boil, and by chance bursts, and is like a cow's teat, and for this reason it will be called by the ancients "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary that you treat the tendon as we have said, and heal it until it heals.
de erratique	From erratic [situations]
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of a woman is not perceived or small, it is natural by birth, or an accident caused by disease that comes about; or it is due to the joining of the cervix, or from the soft or thick sifak, and it happens in the womb, or the sides, or beneath, or wherever it may be; and they are unable to conceive, give birth, and possibly have flowers; and their knowledge of this is by observation of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the stoppage is about to appear, it can be at your throat or nose.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If the poison is subtle and about to be at the liver, hasten and do this: place your index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two livers, while the subtle poison remains round, and close the stoppage; then take wool, wet it in oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman rest at home for each day, so that she cannot defecate.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the poison is hard and large, you must cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the stoppage is from milk, suspend it at the onion and cut; have medicines made of coagulated blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with egg; then bring a large bandage, so that the wound cannot close; and thus let it remain long, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a childbirth brings forth frost, it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscess is aggravated.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For in an aggravated abscess during childbirth, one should not do anything.
des emorroides	From hemorrhoids [a condition characterized by inflammation of the veins around the anus or lower rectum]
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without cure are usually not treated, and when hemorrhoids become old they turn into ulcers; and we have already said in the division their similarities, signs, and here I will say those that respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are completely in childbirth, and are not felt by touch, should be cured with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those at the mouth of the womb, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then put the tool near the nails, and hit at the roots, then sprinkle medicinal powders that stop blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press her feet to the floor for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if there is bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and ivy leaves and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 If there is bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, make it sweat with mustard plasters on the back and without injuring the breasts; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or elder with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess rests, if you treat the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, resembling a rough crust, so it must be covered as I have said in the ointment recipe; and then let it heal.
des apostemes de la marris	"from the rectum" - del recto
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscess come in marriage (a euphemism for the female genital area), such as boils, painful abscesses, herpes, syphilis, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, I must describe the hot abscess that comes in marriage (the female genital area), which is not like those abscesses that heal on their own; and if you want to know the work of iron (surgery), observe whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hurry to puncture [the abscess], but let it heal as long as the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on a chair, or two small chairs where he can lean, and support him on his back and align his legs at the parts away from the leg; and let his thighs be spread out, and place his arms beneath his knees, and tie them well with a strong rope; then bring the pus towards the right side, and introduce the instrument used to open the abscess, from which the form follows; and it is necessary that when you see you have introduced this instrument, that you pierce the point first to know the depth of the abscess, so that whatever enters within from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt [the abscess]; and it is necessary that you place the tip of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess opens and it is touched with the thumb, it should be covered with oil of roses or freshly boiled linseed oil; and when the cavity is empty, you should put moistened linen cloths soaked in oil of roses or freshly boiled linseed oil into the wound; place the linen cloth from the wound to the end of the arrow, and on top of the arrow and on the netted linen a clean, moistened linen cloth soaked in vinegar or malves that have been cooked; then treat it for two days with ointment until it heals; sometimes lift the arrow and the wound using an enema of vinegar and honey, and then of vinegar or long-cooked roots of lilies and aristolochia; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is closed in a marriage (hernias), you must avoid iron cure, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	The birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is first necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs when you see a woman after labor, desiring to push out the fetus; then hasten the birth of the child; thus know that this childbirth conforms to the natural figure, and it comes forth with its head and the second one follows; and when you see these signs, press gently on her abdomen so that the child is born quickly; for as soon as it descends toward its head, the afterbirth accompanies it, and the marriage is discharged of its excesses by good cleansing; and he who comes out in any other way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 For there often comes upon the feet, or upon the body or shoulders, or the hands, or upon the belly, or the back, and it changes by chance upon the neck, or through other malicious shapes; therefore it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and skilled in such matters, and avoid errors and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out first through natural delivery and the woman delivers with great effort, and her strength is weak, let her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the midwife's little spatula between her fingers in the shape shown here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Then cut the afterbirth, and strike its nail so that the moisture within it escapes; and hold the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, you must cleanse the woman with fennel juice and camomile oil; then make her take and vomit emetics, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: this will help the infant now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out [of place], you must gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot be put back, put a woman on the chair, lift her feet up; then turn the chair onto the ground, and bind the woman so she does not move during the process; and if the hands still cannot be put back and the child dies, cut open the dead child with the knife that is placed before you, take out the child, and reset [the hands] equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out on its feet, you must push it upwards; and then turn it bit by bit, until it is even; then grab one of its feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it can jump up to such height, when commanded to jump, and causes it to vomit convulsively; if it jumps away, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not leap as we have said, you must turn it gently and slowly, according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come as we have observed, say that you give her muscillaige of height, oil of sesame, and beeswax melted, and grind everything in a mortar; put this ointment into the woman's nature and apply it externally; then let her sit in hot water up to the chest; and when she is softened below, let him apply myrrh oil, and place it below, and leave for an hour; then let her sit on a chair, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and press lightly on the stomach, because the infant jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the exit of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the infant comes in this form, place his hands little by little on the belly; then lay him gently on his back, and hang his feet downward, and let him lie on the bed; fold his hands little by little, then take hold of his hands above the stomach, and push the knees out of the way as far as possible; and if the infant does not come, take hold of his feet and pull them firmly, then pull the belly upward, then place your hands; and stroke the infant little by little; and command the woman to grasp herself until the infant is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the infant's delivery which comes out with a hand's breadth wide.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to attempt to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and spread out her legs widely; then bring the mustard plaster that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and stroke the infant according to its natural figure, and make it vomit, and command it to grasp itself until the infant is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the birth of the child on its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the midwife touch her hand, then gently twist and twist it bit by bit, and ease it slightly; and when it is leveled, place the natural musk on top of it, as we have said, then command it to move bit by bit; and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to take hold of it; then make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, you should proceed with everything
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When the afterbirth comes in this manner entirely, you should pinch the afterbirth with your fingernail until the membranes are emptied; and if the child presses against her face and neck, you should strike it from below so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then push the child inside as necessary, and command the woman to seize it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange and seldom happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 These are strange things that do not live unless they are named; I know what they are, they multiply, and are sought by the one who designs them, which is related to filth; and sometimes they issue naturally like mice, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 If they issue loudly, the cure is as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do in such a way as it is worth moving for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children (lit. from many children)
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb for one or two or three or four or five or six, or up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the balm knows this because sometimes similar things happen; do accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you cure the woman of the dead or miscarried child, and it doesn't come out by itself and you are forced to operate by hand, then you should know if the woman is in good health and has no accident or fear of death. The woman should lie on her back, with her hips inclined downwards and her legs raised. The attendant should apply a mixture of oil and musk-scented alum and fenugreek seed to the mother's mouth, then anoint his hands with these oils and mixtures. Then he gently inserts his fingers into the mother, seeking the position where the fetus is located. If the fetus is near the head, he should fish it out from its neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the navel or near the ribs, and if the expulsion is from the feet, he should grasp or pinch it and at the mid-ribs. The attendant should hold the instrument in his right hand, with the curved part between his left fingers, and gently insert the instrument into any of the positions mentioned above until he reaches an empty spot. This is the shape of the instrument:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then insert the arrow against another bone, or if you need to extract it, so that the extraction is even; and then make it even by moving it from one side to the other to come out, and the bones should be dented for holding it in place while moving, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if there remains a part of it, press the thumb of one hand with oil against that part and push in that part while pulling the other part; and if there remains no part, insert this bone or higher up in its place, and do so until it completely comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to strain, you must wrap it with a cloth until it completely comes out; then break it at the joint of the sole or at the toe, and do so in the other foot as well.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's shoulder is large and it is narrow in the opening, or if it has a tight neck assembly, you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers, and press the neck and extract the tightness; or you may use the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one; and in the same way do the same for large natural births; then pull out the bones with the pliers, and if the shoulder jumps out and it is pulled with force, it may be cut, as necessary for the moisture that is in a worse position; and if it cannot come out, you should break it into pieces where you can. And if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the swelling is above the feet, the treatment is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the bladder is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is dislocated in the abdomen or hip, you must straighten it with the hand wrapped in a cloth; and make the abdomen or hip, until the moisture that is there is corrected; and if other members are broken and the joint remains, you push the ball of your hand deep inside the cavity, and pull out; then you push the bone out further and continue pulling; and if the cavity of the bone is constricted due to an abscess that has come in, you should not work on it, instead you should administer moist and fat substances; and you should introduce plasters, and apply cool soothing and softening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, bring forth what we have said in the living child; and if there is no power to do so, draw it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done that, bring forth what we have said in abscesses arising during marriage, and if bleeding occurs, it should be tightly constricted, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I have seen a woman whose fetus had died, then a second one was placed on top of the dead one and it revived.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came to the armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began great purulence.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and thought long about it, but could not stop the bleeding from the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong-drawing plaster, and an object came out, and after several days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I wondered much, because the stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I suspect that it is the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I cut the bone in the wound, as long as the woman was in the best position; and the woman lived for a long time in this condition, and afterwards a little pus came out from the side; I do not recall this chapter being used except when masters find something strange that they know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Return the arm to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, with which you weigh books; and at two turns to the two shoulders of the two hinges.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The first horn should be more subtle for binding, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the hole in the stick should be large, and the edges of the sticks should be, and one and a half palms long; and between the two limbs there should be two joins of the same stick, which should be fastened on one side and the other, half a palm long or slightly more; and these two joins are inserted into the hole of the stick to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, similar and more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of the stick of ebony or boxwood, like the pliers; and have two joins, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you are about to open the sheath with the whole instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread apart, then place the two joins side by side in the sheath, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs; then work your hand with the entire instrument as you have done with the pliers, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the sheath, until the woman gives birth.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these tools are covered and multiplied in their likenesses; and when the master has prepared them, then he works more quickly, and higher for humans according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Never disdain the tool that you have not prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it must be instructed that the patient holds in her urine, and then makes herself vomit with emetics, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose; if she jumps due to this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If it is not so, take a cup and place a pot or cover and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, centaury, calaminthe and horehound; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a hose or pot spout into the pot, and the other end into the woman's mouth, and hold it until the vapors come inside the woman; then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one jumps quickly.   In this context, it seems like "secondine" refers to a condition or symptom, and "hastanment" means suddenly. However, without additional context, it's hard to determine the exact meaning of these terms in this specific passage. It would be useful to have more sentences surrounding this one for a better understanding.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal as commanded, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk-scented alum, and then apply it to nature, and search for it; and when she has found it, take it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the man does not resist extraction; but it should be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and detach itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the man is stretched open, we have said the cure for opening and fumigation of herbs; and if it does not heal as we have said, ensure that you do not force pulling; but it should be held to the woman's thigh, then clisterize with ointment tetrafarmaçon; if she bears it and it heals, it will close; but nevertheless, when she can, if it comes badly, it causes discomfort to the woman.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary for suitable fumigations for this purpose: no ancient person has proven the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for the retention of flowers and the expulsion of the afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it seems like a piece of glass, and put the head subtle in its nature, and the shoulders wide on fire; and let the fumigation be on the coals, and the tinder until it is wasted, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it has been stopped up by a subtle substance: therefore, you must pierce that substance as required, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful so that it is not touched; then put moist linen on it in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt it will stay in place, then pierce a splint of wood and leave it for several days, and remove it when the patient is able to go to his rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it must be covered: if it is to heal, as we have said earlier with the splint of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come under the foundation are nodulation, and those that come out from below the foundation overflow, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodulation is old, it should be operated on, and sometimes moisture awakens blainche or subtle bowel, and these fistulas are called persans; and they are known by those who are skilled that there is either evacuation or ventosity when the patient makes evacuation, and occasionally a jump upwards.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the knee joint, and even up to the neck of the cube (coccyx).
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one recognizes the fistula persevering at its foundation, and not persevering: and it is that you bite your little finger or foundation, and bite a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If there is twisting, you bite a thin splint or horsehair, feeling the splint or hair at your finger until you feel it; and if you do not feel it and it does not bring pus discharge, wind, or worms, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the conduit of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced to the joint of the knee, then the splint comes to the level; if there is no twisting and the source of pain is not found, it is that it has been dislocated already, and neither medicine nor ointment avails, nor does any labor or vanity of foolish healers who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In a person who is not a paralytic and not elderly, in hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and lift the legs up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the abdomen; then thrust a probe of iron, or one of wood if there is a curvature, until you feel where the probe comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels something around the foundation, then you must thrust your index finger, and if it senses that the probe has pierced through, then it should be discovered or where you feel the bone or the cartilage, then know that it is paralyzed; do not touch it anymore as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 One should say that some can be healed well, but it happens rarely; and the aid that one gives, if it is to heat the cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before; and push it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred threads are burned, which resemble a feather of an eye; and then cure it with moistened tent-like bandages until the charred threads are gone, then cure it with ointment soothing and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise, and if the fistula is covered with a tent but not perforated to the base, and there is a covering thick of char or syfac between the hand and the tent, so that you can see the fistula through the opening in the covering; then take the fistula's edge from its beginning, and push forward towards the tent, and then the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be released and charred; then remove the burnt threads which resemble a feather of an eye, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound is gaping, and cuts between you and the incision, cauterize it with fire or medicine ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery performs two good actions: the burning of these adjacent characters, and the stopping of blood and the removal of moisture; then it cures soaked tents filled with butter or coarse cheese until the flesh softens, and the characters are burned in the bowl; then it heals the wound with permanent healing ointments that are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is treated, it becomes healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the full depth of the foundation, and is removed from the body, push your finger or foundation in there and check it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent, and between it is the cloth or the skin or characters that are about to pierce, there should not be more than a way of faith and hope through the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you strike until bottom, or if you can, place tents and heal as before; and do not go too deep, so as not to cover the foundation, let the pus come out willingly; then heal, as we have said; by chance it may heal, or you remove that covering and clean it when it is cut away from the foundation, either by a tent or by another tool appointed; then remove the dead flesh in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you press the tip into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation below the skin above, take a pierced needle with this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert one thick thread into two, and push the sheath all the way to the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 When the fistula is on the edge of the foundation within, then draw out the thread from the pierced needle, so that you press your thumb or base; and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and hold one against the other, and leave it for a day or two; and tie it occasionally, until the threads catch these cartilages that are between them, and they become one; then heal the wound until it is sutured and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce itself, then make it pierce in every possible way, as long as it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it should not be covered with a plaster that goes too deep, and then healed as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the pointed spindle with which a fistula is made is very sharp at one end and slightly rounded on the other, for this reason, you must not press where you should not press, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Emorrydes (boils) are of two types: they are inside the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood, and there may be one or several, and they bulge from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that bulge have little moisture, and there may be some pus or blood, and they take on the color of the body; and the cure for those that are inside the foundation is that you command the patient to strain in order to pass them in chambers, until the foundations settle, and this appears in the sons; if you hurry, and hold them with pliers, or with your nail, then strike at their roots; and if the tweezers cannot hold them due to moisture, take hold of them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a swab of wool; and pull them towards yourself, then strike, and powder some hot powders on top, such as cautery powders; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter of cautery, afterwards cure them with other remedies until they are healed; and if the foundations cannot come out, clisterize the patient with a biting and harsh clisterium to clean what is the foundation, so that it comes out openly; when the patient strains and the sons are removed from the foundation, the cure is easy; and it is that you take hold of them with your nail or pliers, strike them, and then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You should apply the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle and make it large; and tighten the thread, then knot it, and pull out the needle, and do the same for all the others, leaving the excess blood to flow; then place the damp linen cloth in rose oil or pine resin on the foundation, and place it, and command the patient to rest; then leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, you should cure it with an ointment and other treatment, until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The drying of wounds or foundations
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying of wounds in the intestines due to natural constraint and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you burn with a spatula or your nail the skin on top, so it does not get moist; then heal it until it dries as necessary; and if it cannot heal, then repeat the shaving more strongly than before, until it heals and is burned; then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	toothache.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Formica is a small appearance rooted before the body, and it goes deep inside; and sometimes the troves are felt, and it feels like death trembling all over the body, and it comes in all parts, especially the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is that you take a cane of an owl feather, or a strong hen's feather, and put the cane on the trembling, so that the circles constrict the trembling all around; then turn your hand all along the cane until you enclose all around the trembling, and push it in deep, and burn the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see (it), do as follows with a cat of oil or iron in this manner, and make it thin underneath and draw it out from above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not perforate, as it is to maintain the tooth, and press more; and if you see (it), cauterize the pain, as it is in front or chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the clyster   This sentence does not have a direct translation equivalent to English, but "clistere" refers to an enema or rectal irrigation, and "de la forme" means "of the shape". The context suggests that the author is referring to the instrument used for this procedure.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes a silver or copper clyster, or melted tallow or oil, is made; and sometimes these small or large instruments are made, depending on the ones brought to hand.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those to be treated in children's care and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the cupping glass can be both small and large, or the abdomen is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And it should have an opening where the abdomen is joined, as you see, and the chest should be pierced within; and there should be two holes on one side, and one on the other; and put inside the abdomen the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be some space, then insert strong thread through the holes in the shape of an X or circle, and assemble the abdomen like a goatskin; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then close it up; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, and oil or egg yolk or something similar should be applied to the head of the plaster, then gently inserted; then the ministers should spread it with their two hands until it is completely visible, then remove the plaster, and tie the patient's legs to the floor, so that the medicine can come out; and if it comes out entirely, it is a greater aid if he sleeps all night.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize in the disease of belly decay, and the medicine is quick to heal, continue it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are ulcerated or abscessed, whether they be the child's enema, the form of the enema should be as subtle as for a child:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments for hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are by impact of a stone, cutting with a sword and knife, or spear or arrow, or similar things; or those that are made according to the body's laws, such as the wound on the neck, head, stomach, liver, and similar limbs; I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound or abscess comes about or a head injury occurs, and the bones are not broken, be careful if it is due to an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large; doubt the presence of an abscess: immediately make it drain from the head itself, even if blood comes from the wound; and empty the patient's swelling with wine and thick foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it does not want to drain, reduce its food and do not drink wine or eat meat; and place on the wound, if an abscess appears, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in stiptic wine; and if there is no abscess, place on the fresh wound, with all its blood, and not moving by air, the powder that I will say a little later; and if fire has moved it, place some ointments on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and its lips cannot be brought together by tension, bring them together by suturing, as I will explain for abdominal wounds by suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound exposes the bone, is gaping and does not hold together, press it; then treat the wound with medicine, fill the gap with hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat solid foods such as cooked heads (of animals) or bread, pulses (beans), and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if the skin or flesh rots away and there is no bone exposed, press everything and pour sulfur (fumes), then treat it; if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting, try to stop the artery; if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize (it).
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if the wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; put this powder on it so that the arse moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the way of the powder is: take a part of incense; dragon's blood II parts; live coal III parts, and grind them finely, and apply it to the wound, making sure it forms well and blends with all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it to heal if it doesn't swell; for medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes they do this with only chalk when there is no incense nor dragon's blood, but the ulcer has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the fire has burned the wound, especially in that case, do not put this powder on it; instead, apply some digestive ointments or wheat flour poultice made with water and honey until it heals over; then cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps; I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes or is in the neck and it is simple without any difference from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, there should be no other instrument than to let it heal, and nothing binding should be put on it because it harms the nerves and causes them to shrink; and nothing cold should be placed on the wound because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, as warm water washed in sweet oil, and boiled water washed likewise in sweet oil, and other stones of this kind according to this manner, and immediately moistened.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, then cut it and bind it with strips, until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and closed and full of pus, pierce it or deeper; if the artery is cut, and blood flow comes out, stop it, lance it, and cauterize if necessary; if the spine of the throat is cut or the veins, keep them guarded so that the flesh goes upward, and do not touch the throat but replace it according to its natural shape; then tighten it gradually, and leave it for some days, then treat with decayed onions until it heals; and if the wound has pressed into the bone, open it; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out completely if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound becomes purified and aligned; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a sword or dagger wound, and the wound is deep, observe whether the wound gives off vapors when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal; if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it immediately nor tie it for the blood that stops up, let it return to the heart, and leave the patient; but apply attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound 3 or 4 days, or more; the spasm, bad tremor of heart nor strange symptoms of pain will not come; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat the wound and other treatments while it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, then make an incision, knowing that there is a fistula; treat it as needed.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, deep, or on the back, treat the front part of it; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, use powder, and if it is close to the bone and has broken into pieces, deal with the wound and pull out any foreign bodies if they are loose; if they are not loose, let the wound drain and allow for the extraction of pus from other wounds as described previously.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Breaking of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The first dismemberment of the belly is large, medium, and small; from a large wound, sometimes intestines or parts of the intestines come out, because of the insertion of them; and the suturing is more difficult, and often a small wound is worse than a large one, since it requires more effort to put the intestines back in place if they are not put in carefully; for this reason, the medium-sized wound is more beneficial, since the intestines can be moved back into place where they belong rather than at other places. And know that the incision of the belly is according to four types: the two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the sutures of other wounds of the body and the sutures proper for other wounds are common for other wounds; however, they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes out of it, it is easy to set (the injury), this is one of the two ways: either because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, thaw it in one of these ways: either by soaking a sponge or a piece of wool in hot water only, or you cook in hot squine and cipre and spike, and clean the intestines until the swelling is removed; and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is boiled to reduce (the swelling).
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling spreading (or growing), if the intestines are bad or sour and cooked, for this reason the entrance is blocked almost completely; and if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is boiled until it is cut, but one should not cut too much; and this is the instrument to split (the intestines): if you slice through from within into the cavity and do not push out, and look at the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, if it can be reinserted according to its natural form in its proper place, do so, for it is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, raise the head and feet higher than the other parts, and similarly if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, direct your attention so that the damaged part is higher than the other, and do the same for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, use the appropriate tools, then place a compassionate person who will cover the entire rupture with their hand and close the lips; and this is the common method of suturing, and it involves taking an awl or several, according to the size of the wound, then leaving space at the edge of the wound and inserting an awl with a strong thread; puncture the two skin layers with the two layers of fascia beneath the skin, as far as you can pierce that part, and bring together the four edges of the fascia; then bind the awl with double thread around it, then bring together the two edges of the wound in order, and leave space again, and insert another awl; tie the thread as you did for the first awl, and continue doing this according to how many awls you need, until the entire wound is bound; and the awls should be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, because fine awls pierce all the flesh, and overly large ones cannot enter well. And it is not good to insert the awls at an angle from the flesh and skin, lest they damage the wound before it heals; and afterwards bind the heads of the awls, so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the heads of the awls to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. This method of suturing with awls is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one awl or two if a secondary suture is needed, and involves bringing together the skin layers and fascia edges at one awl with a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced all four edges together, remove the awl to the part where you began, in the manner of sewing cloths; and place space between each stitch the size of a small egg; this suturing is called "home suturing," and I sewed a wound on a man who had a belly wound caused by a knife, and it was larger than one palm, and his intestines were about two palms long, and the wound was inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned the intestine as it had been twenty-four hours before, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none was found, nor any medicine; and I placed old cotton twice a day on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 I will now tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and thrust it from the outer side to the inner; when it has pierced the flesh straight through, place the tip of the point or where you have stuck the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inner to the outer; and the meaning of this stitching is that you sew as pelters sew fur, and leave one hole on one side, then take it up from the other side, until the stitching is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is as follows: gather the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the edges to the other edge, in this manner: insert a needle or edge near the mirror, and pierce only that place; leave the two edges of the mirror; then turn the needle and pierce from the part behind until it reaches the inside, through the two edges of the mirror; then pierce one and the other from the part behind until it reaches the inside, in the two other edges of the mirror that are on the opposite side; and this is the most common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens said this word, and it is testified by all, that one should sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each; and it must be done as those who sew purses do, by inserting one needle from one part, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew purses; and know that when the wound is inside the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgement of the wound is similar to that of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, before the arse moves it, you should return the intestines, and the fat; then put powder healing charcoal on it, and if the arse has moved it, put any ointment present on it until the wound heals over; stitch it, and bind it with sifac, and mirach; then care for the wound as you would others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, immediately apply old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound may spread to the main parts of the body, then you should wet soft linen with warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the wounds and under the saddle; and if there is pain or swelling in the bowels, and this often occurs, then clisterize with black wine, and similarly if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine known as "jeun" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is due to the inflammation of the veins that are present there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the hernia jumps from the wound, put it back in place like an intestine while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned or black, you must tie off the area that is black, so that no blood comes out, for there are veins and arteries; then cut the part between the ligament, and hang the two heads suspended from the underside of the wound to facilitate the extraction when the hernia falls, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, as I have seen a man who was pierced or wounded by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and bloating; I cured it according to what I knew, and did not stop fumigating until it healed, and the wounds were sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it sewn up, I feared that the patient had ill in his belly; and there was no ill, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and any experimentor said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that it should be bound in this manner: take a deep breath with great bellows, then press the lips of the wound together, and when the breath has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches the mouth open; then strike the head, and hold it so that it cannot loosen, then put another deep breath in this manner until the wound is fully captured; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the head becomes inflamed in the intestine and brings no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, as follows: take the end of this thread of intestine and tie it to the head of a fine linen thread twisted together, then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine, and tie it in place; and this method of suturing is not forceful but rather relies on faith and hope. If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no trick or cure, except through subtleness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it swells and becomes hard.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And a fistula is according to the truth, a hard and white swelling that does not cause pain, and likewise becomes as hard as a bird's feather; sometimes it clears up with a clear discharge, and other times it becomes thick; sometimes it is small, and other times large; sometimes it appears suddenly, and other times gradually; I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, is not otherwise than by one of the nine causes: namely, because of the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard matter within it, and above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or it has too much pus; or the wound is torn, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because corruption is the manner of pestilence; or because the region's property is slow digestion, late health, and prone to nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and their remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I shall tell you the cure for fistula made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, arteries, nerves, or the intestine, bladder, ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if such a fistula comes to the property of the main member and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all such fistulas are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance, except for any fistula that does not come up to the level I mentioned and you have confidence in its cure, and you know it; if so, take a tent of wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, pierce it; if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle tent of reed, as reeds bend with twists; and if the fistula has been torn and you cannot seek it well with tents, cleanse it through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then treat it skillfully according to your ability, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is completely blocked; ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press your hand, and where they feel it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned, pierce according to what I said, and cut out the defective tissue and corrupted parts that are inside; and then heal it until it is healthy; and if the fistula is deeply rooted straight ahead, you must pierce completely through it as much as possible, then insert moistened tents filled with medicine, and push them to the end of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess tissue that remains inside; and then place clean bandages on it until it is healed; if it does not heal by this means, cauterize it as we have said; and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, pierce it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve does not bother you or your main limbs as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, scrape it until all corruption is removed, then treat with charcoal-like substances until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, it bows as before, know that you are not yet done: uncover it and dig as deep as you can, remove all the decay, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the corruption is too deep that you cannot reach it, know that there is no other solution but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupted bone that can be pulled out with pliers, extract it with an appropriate tool, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave any one behind; and if moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, strike and press the moisture and charcoal, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something irritating pus on the wound and leave it until the flesh is separated around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, press only on the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of corruption and it reaches the bone marrow, it must be cut and covered up to the corruption, and then heal it until it heals; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something inside his body that caused materials to come to the leg, and he had a large abscess that did not burst from any cause; but they mistakenly operated on it out of folly, causing the abscesses to open, and a great amount of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and a lot of pus flowed out which made the body wet and cold; and many people tried to cure him for two years, but there was no wise man in the craft of hands until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and the pus flowing from the openings to a great extent; and the young man's body turned red, and he had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I inserted a tent (or a probe) into one of the wounds, and then searched all the wounds, and found that some were approaching each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Then I hurried and probed into one of the wounds as far as I found a part of the bone, and it was corrupt and perforated; the corruption reached to the bone within; what appeared to me as the corrupted bone, I thought there was no other corruption except that which I left; and I began to heal the wound with medicinal salves for a long time but could not seal it; then I renewed my efforts, and found the bone as before, and discovered that the corruption continued in the bone; I removed it, and tried to set the bone; but I could not do so more than a palm's breadth of the bone, and it fractured completely, then I renewed my efforts with medicinal salves; and it healed quickly and was sealed, and no further work was required except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the blood evacuation often happens, but it healed completely, and a hard cartilage grew in its place on the bone, and it had good composition and did not have any harm or counteraction of any kind, neither in the air nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 If a bone in any part of the body is broken, it should be treated like this: take thread and tie it to the open end of the bone; command someone to pull it upwards; place another thicker thread of linen on top of the cartilage that is from the bone, and tighten the knot so you pull the rotten cartilage under it, and uncover the cartilage where you want it to be, so that it does not blister the cartilage; place a splint or a rod under the bone to cover the rotten cartilage; it should be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a part or throughout, you must uncover all the flesh; then place the iron under it, and then press from one side to the other on the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at a joint, strike the dislocated joint, and the bone that contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other way than to cut; and if the corruption is at the tip of the finger or toe, this is a difficult matter, but you must find out where the corruption is opening; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve interfere with your efforts; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the structure of the bone and its appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and hardness; and therefore it is necessary to equip yourself with an instrument suitable for each type of work; and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the signs of the diseases; so think about the tool you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	hot fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The shoulders may dislocate from within or from without; and when you have treated the corrosion with medicine, but it does not help, you must cover that member up to the level where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes death by this means, or a greater evil, the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterward there will be more blackness, for this corrosion goes from member to member and takes all over the body; hasten to cover it, and if it is due to the sting of some venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, weasels and similar, cover it at the head of the hand, and do not give it any space to come up to your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it comes up to the hand, strike at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, strike at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it's death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue; and thus do when the corruption comes or falls: if it comes at the first joint, strike after the other joint; and if it comes or falls, strike all the joint; and if it goes to the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it goes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die; and the way to strike or soothe the member is that you bind it above and below, and extend one servant one cord below, and another servant the other cord above, and you draw the flesh which is between the two cords with a spatula wide enough so that the bone is exposed; then strike or soothe, and put linen cloth on each side, so that the soothing does not touch the healthy part, and bring the corruption to another place.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. And if bleeding of blood comes when you work, then cauterize the place immediately, or apply some powders that restrain; afterwards return to your medicine until it is complete; then bind the member with a suitable ligature, and cure it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my time: there was a blackness which looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on the foot of the man, until it covered the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he plastered the foot with copper and became well; and for a long time afterwards, the corrosion returned to his toe or hand, and it came to me; I applied restorative things after the cleansing of the body, but the corrosion could not cease; and he asked that I amputate his hand, and I did not want, because I had hope of restoring the matter; and I also feared that if I amputated his hand, that he would die, for the strength of man was weakened; and he despaired of everything, and returned to his earth, and plastered his hand with copper and became well; and I have not told this story except for the reason that one does otherwise when it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Sometimes an abscess appears in a charred place, and it stays for such a long time that it causes a large swelling of flesh; and then it grows and pierces, and the flesh jumps out with it, leaving the place open, just like a soldier; and the skin that is above it is as delicate as unravelled fabric, and does not reach the bone or nerve, and such illness is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone fully, it is called "fistula"; and the skin should be cut all around, in the same way as unravelled fabric; and it does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. And if the skin is inflamed and corruption is not complete, and the flesh is thick, cure it with a clyster in this way: check if the breasts are large and the nipples that are in it are odorous; then clysterize with an Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take asafoetida, oil, litharge, equally, cook them together in a pot over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens to the consistency of honey; then take according to your need from this, make it into water and honey, and clysterize the breast, hold the wound open; leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it while straining; do this many times, until the breast is healed and the pus is gone; and at any time clysterize with water of vinegar ashes, when this medicine is not present, and take vine ash water, pour it on, then rinse, and clysterize, until you know that the breast is well healed; if the patient cannot endure it, or the Egyptian medicine and the vine ash water, then clysterize with water and honey or mead where the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine strengthens the blood; when you have done this and you have confidence that the breast is well cleaned, then clysterize with those substances that cause it to produce char in the breast, and take defaecating remedy and oil roses and wine; or clysterize with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken their properties or how to treat ointments; if the wounds of the breast are small, and the clyster nozzle cannot enter, then widen it slightly with a knife point, and apply an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened; if the wound is too large, then tie it up and leave only enough room for the clyster or the nozzle to enter, and if the wound emits pus, then cover or lower it.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the intestine is completely protruded, do not allow it to be retracted by force; and if you cannot cover the abdomen as desired, arrange it in such a way that the intestine moves downwards to its lowest point, because when the intestine is completely protruded, do not allow it to be retracted by force and if you cannot cover the abdomen as desired; then arrange it so: let the intestine move gently downwards without leaving anything of the intestine; take medicines for setting to apply on the wound, and place a linen cloth over the entire wound; then press strongly towards the hernia orifice that is larger than the first, because the hernia will be plugged up with the other cloth according to the size of the orifice, and place it over the hernia orifice in order to align the intestine, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and the one who is over the hernia orifice, frequently removes it to realign the hernia, and knows if anything comes from the hernia, whether it is venom or pus or too much, or indigestible; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread out in this way and you see the nature that arises on the hernia orifice, then know that the intestines have closed already and approach healing; then remove it in the morning, or the third day, and when you are removing the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the packing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are swollen improperly after many days, know that breasts do not always swell.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle venom poisons for a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 There are some people whose wounds do not heal for a long time or who make them worse; and if the breast swells indigestedly after many days, know that it will not shrink; and if the breast does not dry out, and is swollen and protruding, use drying medicines containing moisture in substance and dryness in effect, such as plaster of Paris, for it is the last medicine; use plaster of Paris, mixed with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine; then let it set and use it; and if plaster of Paris is not available, use myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, powder them on the honey when it is on the fire; and then apply a cloth to it, and sometimes administer an aromatic oil and celestial roots, which are like flour and cinnamon; and use simple medicines or compounds: grind them, make powder, and sprinkle it on the honey that I have said, and use it; if the wound is deep and not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is complete, and it presses into the bone or hard members or joints; if the wound is cured by a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Parasitic abscess originates beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes elsewhere; and when it is neglected, if not attended to, the abscess grows, spreads and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, possibly even destroying it completely. The corrosion advances up to the bone, causing painful odor and enlarging the joint, turning its color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When treating as described in the previous section and it does not help, then you must cut away all the remaining excess of the nail and cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact; and when the skin around the nail begins to swell and turns white, and it starts to bleed, you should place heat under the nail so as not to burn the skin, push it upwards slightly, cut away the affected tissue gently and lightly, apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then cure it with warm ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corruption is in the bone, strike and draw it out, for as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the tooth corrupting, strike it with one of the teeth that was mentioned before, then heal it when it is healed; and if it is pierced, wounded, and causes great pain, it is necessary to drain it first; then strike the nail with a pointed spatula in cutting across it from above, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, place something over it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the hand is deafening
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The fingers that grow on some men by accident are all flesh, and sometimes they have bones or nails, and one of them may not grow in the root of the joint, or their growth is in one of the fingers of the hand.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one born in any natural way should not be silent, and the one born at a joint may possibly be silent; the size of the one who is fleshy shall be light, in this manner: measure him by his root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	A newborn from the joint root is difficult to cure; hold it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For the one who is born or should be in the last birth, you must first cut the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and heal it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come to the joints often come by birth, or by injury from a wound, or by burn from fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If you must cut that suture, so that it may be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between them two tents or dampened cloths in oil rose, so that they do not stick together; or you put between them two thin planks until the joint is healed, as required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it happens that one of its two [parts] comes with the palm, then strike the joiner [or joint] as necessary.
des vils	 The poor (ones)
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 Wounds are large swollen ones filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in many members of the body; and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must sometimes administer purge for the liver, and then cleanse the basilica (small intestine).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The iron cure is in two ways: one is to strike it, and draw out black blood; the other way is that you open a vein and let all the blood flow out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The incision is made in this way: first the leg of cold water is warmed up very strongly, until the flesh becomes thin, then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the knee; then make an incision in a vein, either in one place or in two places or in three, with a large cut, then separate and draw out black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the disease's strength can bear; and then sew it up, and command him to eat meat that is stimulating black bile; and repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and help the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The elevation of the hernia is carried out in this manner: raise the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then immerse it in water, or if not available, heat it with fire; and apply it to the groin area along the thigh, or in the part below the knee; then scrape the skin at the edge, and peel off the vein from both sides, as soon as you feel it; it will appear red and black, and when it appears under the skin, it seems like a white cord; then push the intestine down, until it is elevated from the skin, and then pull it up gently, then press again in another place three fingers away; peel off the skin over the vein again as before, then lift it, and press again at the other notch, as done previously; then make another cut, or more if needed; lift it again, and press at the base of the foot, then pull and lift until you reach the second cut; draw it out, one section by section, until it all comes out, then press; and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, insert a strong double-threaded needle through it, pull and draw, insert it under the intestine, turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; be careful that it does not pop out, for if it pops out, it cannot be drawn or lifted, causing harm to the patient; and when you have treated it all, place damp wool soaked in vinegar and oil over the wound; and care for it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it open forcefully, but do not cover it up; draw it out as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The shape of the iron used to pierce the face should be curved and not sharp, so that it does not cut the vein; it should be thick because if it is too thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said. Here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where no grass or trees grow and in dry ground; it may also grow elsewhere, but this happens due to the corruption that comes from below the skin, as when snakes enter the body through the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very large inflammation comes in the leg and then the pulse changes and the vein begins to forcefully emerge, as a root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the shoulder is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from 7 to 12 inches wide and sew it, leaving the cloth on the leg and every time it starts to swell, wrap it again around the cloth and sew; if it becomes too long, cut part of it, and wrap the remaining part and do not cover its root, until it is completely out; for if you cover it, it returns into the flesh, causes abscess and purulence or other illness. Therefore, it should be treated little by little up to the neck and no remnant remains on the body; this vein can sometimes be as long as 5 or 10 fingers, and once I had a man come to me whose vein was 10 fingers long, when you cover it with lard or lead, pierce it all the way through, so that everything drains out. Empty the matter inside it and apply herbal medicines for purulence every day, then cure it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes at this vein, many hands are applied, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or hand, causing a great loss and bleeding that jumps; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 from worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called "cattle sickness" on our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body expanding and contracting, causing pain in one member after another as it moves through the skin or goes away, and jumps out; it is poisoned by corruption of some humors, like serpents and worms and ascarides in the stomach; and there is doubt about its harm, for when it travels through the body, it moves towards the head and reaches the eye, possibly entering it, and destroying the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it to be cured and drained, one can force it out only when it moves: therefore, you must bind the limb above and below with a strong narrow rope, then strike above and draw it out; and if the wound is deep into the flesh, and you cannot touch it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does, is that it runs oil, as we have said; and if you see oil coming or near to it, hold under it a cup-shaped object, then strike above, and draw it out; and it is necessary to use the patient with purifying medicines of soluble substances for bad humors, and to prevent him from eating spoiled foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 The pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that moves from one member to another; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm; afterward, it began to rise like a worm towards the shoulder, very quickly, as if living silver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain left that place and pierced into the shoulder, then a little later it ran all over her body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it returned around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed at how it moves from limb to limb, because I had never seen this disease in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Moreover, I wanted to point out that pain often wants to move from one place to another, but in the case of this woman, it did not want to do so; and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, exposed armpits, and due to this constraint, it appeared as if the wind were confined; however, this does not apply to those who are delicate and have moist bodies or closed armpits.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, lay it down quickly and firmly on both sides, then press upon it until the breath constrains itself to the place; cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your eyes, treat with what drives out wind such as fetid pills, pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows come in various shapes and sizes depending on where they strike the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 They differ in that some have large points, small, smooth or serrated; those with two angles, those with tongues, and those where there are pieces; and the one which strikes any member does so according to two manners: in a principal member, such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When a limb falls into any position and the signs of death, which I will tell you later, appear to you: it is necessary that you take care of the removal of this arrow, because death comes in many ways after; and when this ill sign does not appear to you at all, and the arrow is not fully inserted, pull it out, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces and hits the skull, and a bubo-like swelling appears on the head, is when scrotum, spermatic cord, and hernia, and redness and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and pus comes out of the wound white like cheese, and also it swells like a blister of meat; and if this sign appears to you, keep away from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inserted.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The signs of an arrow wound when it hits the chest or the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if something hard has been thrust into it, not empty; and sometimes the arrows also become silent like hailstones, and there comes cold blood in the court (cavity), and chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting: know this without doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has never pierced the bone is when there is no pus-like scum jumping out from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and asks for cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrow falls on the bed of the wound, it is lodged between the ribs; it causes great pain and heavy breathing and moves all the limbs of the shoulder.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	If the arrow falls on the stomach, it might cause something undigested flesh to jump out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes or pierces the belly, and does not burst from the intestinal passage, there is no hope in treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the arrow strikes into the bladder, and the urine bursts out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the hands and arms, throat, shoulder, neck, spine of the back, wrists, hips, legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, you should do this instead.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 If an arrow or splinter falls into the root of the nose: I tried to pull it out from another side under the cheek fat, and it came out without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And playing with an arrow that fell into the oil fat beneath the paper under the ear: the arrow was curved, and I could not reach its tip towards the end, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, without any special skills for ears; the game was safe, and no ill accident occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pull an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears (meaning it had barbs): I was the one who pulled it out, and I made it as smooth as possible while doing so, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And pulled an arrow from the man who had it lodged in his throat or belly, and I thought he would die; but after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, devised a plan, drew it out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if an arrow falls or strikes the man on his back, and the wound is sewn up over it; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not alter his natural condition, nor does it find any trouble in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And for another man, who received an arrow in his face and the wound was stitched up; and he endured suffering great pain for a long time; and many similar things happened to him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And a spear was thrown at the king of the princes, who had fallen in the melee, and he leaned slightly to the right side; and the spear was completely retracted three days later, and I was called to treat him afterwards.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I probed it with a delicate probe and did not feel anything; but he felt a prick and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the point of the spear, so I applied a drawing plaster with an attractive and digestive leech to it because the flesh did not swell; and the tip of the spear appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I placed the arm in a sling for several days, and healed the wound straightaway, and kept the patient for a long time until he felt the arrow within his neck; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied an irritating medicine to the wound for several days until it opened, and then tried it, and felt the head of the arrow protruding at its place; then I inserted the medicine into the opening of the wound through that irritant, until the head of the arrow became visible; and after exceeding the term of four months, it burst out so that I could pull the pliers over it, and on both sides, but it could not come out; then I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I got the pliers well made according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, as I pierced it, and returned the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the mirrors judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I will restore it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I have told you the quality of arrow extraction, but you put your care into that which I do not say, because books cannot fully grasp it; but wise masters can compare well with a little thing and with what is present and defective, they find nine solutions, and nine tools, to the detriment of things foreign that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs where they are fixed except in two ways: either through the place where they enter or from another side; and the one that jumps out where it enters is an arrow inserted into flesh, and sometimes jumps out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if the shoulder does not jump now, leave it until the skin is stretched around, and the joint is aligned; and in the same way, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it be like that for several days and move it every day; and then it will jump, and if it still does not jump, pierce all around with a very sharp instrument until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned occur in the patient: do not pull it out immediately, but leave it until it is even after several days, because if the arrow reaches such a state, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrowhead is not fixed entirely but only in the bone and does not reach so far, and the patient remains for some days with bad condition, then try to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply pierced and cannot be drawn out, administer tourniquets around it as I told you; then heal the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrowhead is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, try to find it with all your might; if you feel it, draw it out with any instrument suitable for the purpose; if you can't due to the narrowness of the wound and the deep penetration of the arrow, widen the wound as much as possible; then draw the arrowhead and if there are ears attached like they hold onto something, remove the tissue that is stuck inside it from both sides as much as you can, then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead so you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrowhead while trying to pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, push the lymph down to the joints around it, then pull it, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood obstructs you, bring what we have said in the treatment chapter to your attention; and be careful with the incision of the nerve and the vein, and use devices as much as possible to draw out the arrowhead without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow hit him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do it, position him according to what the sign indicates.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrowhead comes from another place, or it opens something related to it, or the skin is swollen in that area as one can see or feel; cut then around it, as far as the pliers can reach, and then pull it out; if it does not come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes out; and if it was from an arrow, push it all the way in; and if it fell, and you see that it should be administered gently, administer an instrument with a pointed end, so that the point of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; and then push further, and when the arrow is caught by the instrument, push the instrument with the pointed end entering in, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrow is touched, you must cut all around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrow falls or lies in the abdomen or bladder or side and it is near, and you can cover over it, then cover it; and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, and pull it out, and then stitch the wound, if necessary; and care for it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tweezers used to extract arrows is similar to an eagle's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the swelling head [or mass] is like the feather of a bird, to push it to the point of an arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the tweezers for pushing and for grasping is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins in the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 There are 31 veins from which one recovers, of which the number after the ears is 16, namely: two bladders that are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the temples; and the two veins that are in the eyes of the two eyes, which are called "aspir"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the base of the nose; and the two tendons that are at the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly cured in each arm are V: one is the cephalic, located on the left side of the chest and called by the common people "arm vein"; the median is called "fistula", composed of the cephalic and basilic, and called by the common people "heart vein"; the basilic is either on the right side of the chest, and it is called by the common people "ventricular vein", located above the wrist bone, and it is the one that is opened, which clearly appears above the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the cephalic vein is the vein between the little finger and the ring, and has two branches; and in the leg there are three veins: one below the wrist on the left side of the chest, and the second is at the right ankle; and the one called "nesse" which is at the other ankle's wrist; and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The treatment of the veins located behind the ears helps with catarrh and emigraine, as the old physicians have known; and the quality of this treatment, just as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head, and rub the place or the veins with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two dependent places on the head: then press on them, and where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, hold firmly; then take the lancet, and thrust it through the vein up to the bone, then move your whole hand along the vein, and pierce and the skin and the vein well two times through; and let the blood flow until you see; then bind and tie, until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The first artery of the two that are in the temples, is good for migraines, old sores, and eye diseases; it cures tears from the eyes. The quality of the artery is as I say: the patient lowers his neck until the two veins appear clearly; then feel the pulse under your thumb, then press on it; then lift the vein up to your index finger on top of your thumb, insert the lancet into it, lift the vein further and strike, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; then form it, and leave it until it is healed; we have spoken of its covering and its extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The first joint of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the head cavity in the face diseases of old, and it has emigrated and turned red; and the qualities are such that the patient twists his neck while straining, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Place the point on the vein and lift it with your hand, or something else, and allow blood to flow according to the amount that you see; then release the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is healed and not worked on again with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and the vein must be crossed, for the bone is close by, and in case of an accident, the flames might break it when they are too fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The second joints of the veins that are in the eyelids help with swelling, redness, inflammation in the eye, and face diseases; and the qualities of their vein drainage are such that the patient twists his neck in a bind, as before; then drain it, and let the vein drain from the cross, a short length of flame, a little wide, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the vein is thin, it may break; then correct the blood flow, as needed, and then tie it up with cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein of the nose from the nostril is useful for treating ague, scrofula, and diseases of the face such as migraines and redness that come from the face, and especially when it is old. The qualities of the vein are that the patient holds their neck, then compresses their nose with your left hand, and takes subtle flame long, and pierces it through the opening between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open easily and the blood will start to flow soon; do not go too deep, and make the bleeding stop according to necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is quickly restored. This is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The strain of the second joint helps in the setting of the ankle, at the beginning of swelling, and in many diseases, putrefaction, corrosion, herpes, and inflammation; and the qualities of the strain are such that the patient extends his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and the master standing above the patient's head, the patient lying on the bed, then open the vein slightly along its length, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then heal another vein, then untie the ligature, and gently tighten all the veins so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the removal of stones (or kidney stones) from the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of mouth wounds assists in the cooling of the mouth and the corruption of gums, as well as cuts and swellings of the lips, and the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of the removal: have the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I said; then turn the liver, and look at both veins, one is to the right liver and the other to the left, and they are recognized by the fact that they are dark, and by the smaller veins surrounding them; therefore strike one and the other, and if you do not know which ones they are, and you have doubt, then strike the larger one of each, and similarly do with the upper and lower veins above and below, as it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of the removal beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The veins under the tongue, which are located below the language, help after the cephalic vein is opened, and this is when the neck is compressed, and when there are diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of saining are that the patient should spit in your hands before the sun, lift the tongue, and look under each side to find a black vein: thus both are healthy, and do not go too deep, as beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins from which one commonly sains are sained in two ways: either by pressing firmly all over with the flat blade of a mirror or a thin olive-oil-like substance as you cut through, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and small according to the size and compression of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirteenth is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open the veins swollen with thick blood, containing much and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive-oil flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and it is for healing subtle veins with thin blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps to alleviate the diseases that are in the throat, neck, chest, and stomach; it is necessary for the patient to urinate healthily, and for him to release the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 If the artery is struck and bleeding occurs, it should be stopped, as I have said; but the flame should not be pressed, but cut off like a nail.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 If the basilica does not open clearly, you must open it and change another one; or you may choose any other opening from it, or you may urinate in its place by the arm: it opens clearly; and cut off the flame gently, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you wish to find the joint of the bone, it is necessary that you dislocate the arm; touch the joint until you recognize the pulse; then mark the joint with a cross; tie the arm and burn the vein with fire; be careful not to injure the artery when you see the joint swell, for it is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it rises high like a child's urine and the limb without is red and thin, know that it is not of the artery: haste then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then press your finger firmly against it, as it often happens; tie the arm and leave it still, do not let the patient move it; be afraid and do not let it move until it becomes healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not bleeding and the medicine is not present, and it swells up, then cut open the artery if it is open, because the head will shrink back; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a slice of fennel, cut it and take one half and place it well until the next day; if it does not bleed, that is good; if it does, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and stopping the bleeding should not be done in many ways due to the small size of the wound, and the thickness of the thread on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The healing of the vein in the middle helps treat blood from the head above and from the chest below, as it is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the lord to be aware that he bleeds due to the nerve that is beneath, and if it bleeds too much and you find the nerve, inflate and heal it as much as possible, and by accident it may not heal; and this nerve opens up frequently, and if it does not open in any men because of its subtlety, then you must use an instrument to close it; and avoid touching the nerve with your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The first aid for the skull is to draw blood from it and help the eyes; it is necessary to drain with olive oil or myrtle fire, because it is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Moreover, it is necessary to seek the lighter vein and not hurt anything the first time, even if you have to start again; and sometimes the veins swell for some men the first time, but don't hurt them.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you should know about draining is that it is not done unless to maintain health and avoid future illnesses; and the draining should be done in one of the three veins: the skull (cephalic), face (facial), or basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of spring, during summer, and in winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first or third day, after 2 or 3 hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The sacred art of healing administered to diseases has no fixed hours, but when necessity arises during day or night, in all hours and at every moment; and it is not appropriate to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman bearing fruit before the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the elderly over 60 years be treated.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 And when some desire to be healed, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that the intestines are cleansed with a light clyster, if much feces have been retained, so that the veins do not expel the superfluidity harmful to the main organs; nor is one healed who is excessively salty from meats, or drunk, as long as they are in such a state, nor those suffering from dropsy; and if one desires to heal after a colic attack, vomiting, distention of the abdomen, excessive urination, labor, watchfulness, and conjugal relations, and those whose strength is weakened, or injured by weapons or the body itself; then refine the humors, if they are gross, through food and drink and medicines, if you have that power; then immerse [the patient] in baths, provided nothing hinders, to refine the blood, and heal the vein from the side of the third finger as we have said; and protect him on that day from labor, pain, lust, and similar things; be cheerful and joyful, and let the healer be taller than the one being healed, and rub his arm two or three times, then gently pull out the suture above, because when it is too tight or small, it cannot heal without; then rub the area with warm water until the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the healer's fingers with a little old oil, then place his thumb of his left hand under that vein near the joint where you wish to heal, so that the vein does not flee or escape from being cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 For there are veins which flee like ropes in the sinew, and those that are full of windiness, so that when fire is applied to them, they shrink from the flame and cannot open the vein, and such is one of these; and if the vein swells, the wound is too narrow, therefore the sinew-pullers should be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; but if not, then continue a little below or above that place where it did not open, unless the place is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the limb swells and the patient panics, allow it to rest for a day or two, and do not tie the arm: perhaps abscesses will form; do not enter water, then repeat the sinew-pulling if desired; and if the opening is small, or the wound is narrow, cauterize the opening gently and you doubt that blood will flow out as much as you see, put heat directly on it in that very opening; and open it a little hastily, so that the limb does not swell again; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start the bleeding, put a little bit of oil on it, as it alleviates the body from blood, and the oil is transformed in this place where the oil is applied; and similarly administer oil in each bleeding that you make incisions into veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing works for triacle and bow, when it is placed on the joint; if it becomes too thick, it becomes thin and spreads.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when the incision into the vein is small, hurry, and put a moist sponge on it, hot, and keep it for an hour; and you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenish color, it will not harm; and if you see something, put something made of aloes or myrrh, re-melted under warmth, on it, as a plaster, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is abscess and appearance at the opening of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find it soft with the pressure of your hand, this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not put anything on top of what has been said, for by chance it may be in court without the artery; but make .i. plug (or pressure) dry to harden the place, then cure it with another remedy until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its power, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, allow it to drain until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, allow it to become subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it is necessary for the one who is full and hollowed out, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound for him, and let the veins be wide; but for the weak one, do the opposite, and it must be drained little by little, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of draining is safe from the disorder of blood and damage to nerves, and is more effective than draining long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give moistened bread under ripe pears; if he is heated, let him bleed three or four times; and for those of cold constitution, eat before bleeding soft bread in syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If the palm hurts after bleeding much, then it is necessary to apply a poultice of charcoal, and an aromatic subtle syrup; and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if you wish to shatter some bone [or break a bone], and heal it again later, as necessary, when it has been weakened by long healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If you wish to shatter some bone [or break a bone] after the first healing, and it has been strong, it should heal in 9 hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	If you wish to heal from another side, it should heal on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body that is already warm and causes fever; in such a case it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and open the wound as wide as possible; then you reward all the conditions of bleeding, and place your hand on top of the poultice when it stops bleeding, so that death does not come at the site of the poultice, and this happens many times when the bleeder is negligent; and you must not dislocate the arm, and make blood come out a second time, and if the wound is closed, you press firmly; nor should you straighten the arm if it is curved, but leave it until it stops bleeding a second time; or you pierce the point of the flame, so that the congealed blood from the vein issues, and place on top a piece of fresh linen and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the abscess has burst, leave it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If you need to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or in another vein or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is connected to the carotid artery because it is composed of them.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of the wounding is that the patient plunges his hand into hot water until the flesh turns red; then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears clearly, then pierce with care, neither wide nor long; and make a large cut, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be drained, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow out into the water, as much as you need; and if it is in the summer, do not push the hand back in hot water, for it causes more harm in the summer than in the winter; and the wound of this vein is safer than all other wounds, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The hot cautery for the hand should be applied for all liver diseases, and this is the method: hold the hand, immerse it in hot water until the vein flees if you see it; and if the hot cautery passes through, and you cover it entirely with everything, it causes no harm; and do not go too deep because the nerves are completely bare beneath all, and then replace the hand in hot water, so that the wound does not freeze up and cannot heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood as much as is necessary, place oil and wax over the vein to solder it quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve for the left hand applies to the sickness of the mice, and do the same as I told you on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The hot cautery for the spleen should be applied for all diseases under the body such as stomach diseases, retained inflammation, kidney disease, thigh and leg diseases, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the qualities of his wound are such that the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub it over the vein until it perishes, and tie it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes to the many rain; therefore, make a large incision there or at the ankle, which is more beneficial.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut above the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below and make a cut as in skinning; let the flames be anesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the wound cannot be opened, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the wound treatment is required for the first time, it should start again above a little, because the area is salty; do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and similarly do with the softer part of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic nerve is at the knee, and its draining relieves the pain of the thigh, when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the qualities of his wound are that the patient immerses it in water and twists above the ankle four fingers, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, let it be drained in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is more beneficial to cover it, because the area is soft, and it is very susceptible to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't press it, there is no opening or hole in the back of the foot, and turn towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and make as much compression on the blood as you see, then untie the ligament, and put cotton on it and apply pressure; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 blister healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or hairs, or glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cautery called ventosation, which is for wounding, is of two kinds: either it is at all fire, or with fire; and the cautery made by wounding and the evacuation of blood is performed in fourteen parts of the body, so one is entirely in the head, and the others are in the neck; and the others in the two shoulders; and the ventosations under the chin; and the ventosations of the two elbows; and the ventosations of the two knees; and the ventosations of the two ankles; and the ventosations of the feet; and the cautery does not treat blood, unless it is from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it should not be used at all, if as with opening a vein; and it should not be administered either by fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from congestion, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if by necessity or habit it is required to apply cupping glasses, we will administer them every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and in between and at every occasion; for there are some who, when they need to apply cupping glasses, have a heavy head; and there are some who find themselves full and red in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darken under the eyes; and there are some who have a spot of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and bleed; and there are some who think, see spots of blood and vomit and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during winter months, we instruct to fumigate after 4 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The suction of the nose helps with headaches ... that come under the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body; and this cupping is in place of cranial suction, and one who is of a cold constitution should not use it, or one who has catarrh, for it does them great harm; and therefore those with cold headaches should not use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who frequently heal themselves become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the leech a little lower out of fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is located in the sinus of the head and basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial for straining the throat, and for cutting the channel of the windpipe, and completely, and filling; and it must be pushed lightly, because if it holds too firmly, it can cause obstruction in the throat or in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosations in the ribs of the neck cause headaches, otalgia (ear pain), migraines, strangling sensation, and pain at the roots of the teeth; it is located in the sinus of the basilica; you must instruct the patient to press his hand, not to touch the artery, and not to let blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventosations beneath the chin are useful for diseases of the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as similar illnesses that are within the mouth; and it is in the position of the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosations of the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the ribs is as valuable as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; instruct the lord not to poke too deep, for the muscles are naked there and know dark veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The plaster that is on the buttocks is beneficial for treating piles from below, and for diseases beneath, and it must be large, made of flax, because it needs to draw well; and if it is fine, it would break; and this causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The plasters on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and are beneficial for old rain sores, scrofula, bladder diseases, and reduce the flowers; they are in the region of the hips and knees, and weaken the body after long use, and bring pus into various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting on the cupping glass is as follows: First, you empty it and fill it promptly, then apply it quickly and evenly, do not stop doing this until you see the spot turn red and swell, and appear the color of blood; then cauterize, and place the cups again, taking care in the positioning of the body, for there are some who have cold skin or clear pores: it is necessary to make a single incision, and it is necessary to make wide cuts, and a little deep one; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to make two incisions: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to make a third incision; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we must pierce it only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want much blood, we often reward it; and if the flesh is thick, poke deeply, and let the veins be clearly seen, and to those who have thick skin and hard, and who have wide pores, you should anoint the muscles of the ventosities with sharp and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, sharp oil of violet or sweet almond oil or oil of cucumber seeds; and if it is in winter, oil of parsley, lily, camomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if one whom you treat has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after the ventilation with rose water, cold water, water of morello cherries, water of cucumber, water of porcelain or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise with ashes of sage or of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with large superfluities rise from old wine or sour milk or decoction of anise or camomile or others; and it is not necessary to ventilate before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventilation, and it is necessary that he wakes up when he needs to be ventilated and when he has been ventilized.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And let him who is sick and coleric take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuces to drink, and similar things; eat little, eat boiled meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And he who has a cold constitution should take honey syrup and fragrant wine which is neither old nor new, eat little, eat spices and small birds and poultry; on the day when he will vomit, he should drink more than eat; it is also necessary to give some men certain amount of triacetum or musk at times before or after the vomiting, for the support of the main members; but let the hot ones be careful not to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The hollow bladders (caused by injury) are those placed on the liver, spleen, podagrie (gout), abdomen and belly, flanks and loins, because these members cannot be injured elsewhere, and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the nipples when they bleed; to remove the viscosity in a member, as we do with bladders placed on the abdomen or belly to reduce swelling; and to alleviate pain, when there is obstruction or stone, by attracting the obstruction or causing the stone to depart from its place; and thus it functions when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these bladders are administered empty for sucking only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way the bladder is filled with hot liquid or liquid in which cooked herbs like comfrey have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the blister applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should be two fingers and a half in width and depth, and it should have a small hole around the middle, as for pushing an awl, and made of bone, soft enough not to hurt the patient when placed on the member; and in the middle there should be a rod of bone or iron, to place a splint, and they should be big and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; because the swellings of children are different from those of the elderly, and thin from thick.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And the splint should be placed as follows on the member: take the splint of wax or thread, and place it across the hole in the plaster, so that the light is at the bottom of the plaster not to burn the patient; then place it on the member, and your fingers should be above the hole as we said before, so that when one looks, if steam comes out, you remove the plaster; and take the thread again as before, and repeat often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the bladder, which is administered in pleurisy disease, it should not have a plug nor a stopper, and it should only be used when the bladder is full of liquid, and placed on the member alone; and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without plugs or stoppers, they should only be used in members that cannot be bladdered (such as lips and gums), and in open wounds of skin (such as the eye or nose), etc.; and the quality of its use is that when you find bladders containing clear sweet liquid without impurity, you take them; put them into a vessel with sweet clear liquid until they become accustomed to it and have no air in their bellies; then bladder and bladder again, clean the member thoroughly and apply the bladders when they are full and warm; if it is a place where a bladder can be applied, apply it, as this is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If the shoulder is not in place, lift it upwards gently and then down again, very well, and then press it; and if the shoulders remain too close to the body, moisten a linen cloth with cold water, and place it, until the swelling subsides; and if the swelling multiplies, place vitriol powder or similar things on it until it subsides; or you put half-peeled beans on the shoulder and leave them until they harden to the shoulder, it will then be stopped; and if you have more need for this, take other swellings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the swellings do not want to take, rub the shoulder with fresh blood, or you insert a needle until the swelling comes out and then place it, and as soon as they feel the blood, they harden; and when you see that they are dripping, sprinkle some powder of aloe and silk or charcoal on them, they will then stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Learn, dear child, that the foolish man should turn away from this chapter, for he will never see any of the ancient books, nor read a letter in them; and for this reason, science is foreign to our land, because I have never found anyone good at it; and I do not know anything about it, except through the knowledge of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have dealt with the subject, and by experience, and by the practice of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters mentioned earlier.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, let us say the prologue of this book, the sums of speech and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you take care of the patient on both sides, unless something stops you, such as weakness of the body, old age, or children; or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid cold meats, namely raw flesh, eyes of fish and meat, do not drink wine, eat no fatty meats, do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about pus-filled heat, or spreading of matter in the member; if the patient returns to his first primary governance as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that make thickenings, or he should have viscosity, such as cooked oats in water, and meat pies, and pork, and veal, and beef, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this nourishment helps the bones to heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that broken bones in the elderly and debilitated cannot be well regained or mended according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but there is no need for care, set it on the broken bone the large tendons which hold and join the limb together, as forcefully as it was before; and do not bind it completely with its covering, and therefore feed it with large foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks (injuries) are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the neck is other than the break of the foot, or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There is a break that heals quickly, and another that lengthens, like the quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with an open wound, or just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And have your tool and equipment ready for restoration in the appropriate manner, according to what memory comes into its place; and it is known that a bone break occurs when the joint is twisted, and opened widely through dislocation, and struck with the hand; and when there is no tortuosity nor touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no break; but it may have tortuosity, or fissure, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but put on the following medicines and then hold it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the breaks which go to the joints, and are the two parts disjoined, you must now put them in equal alignment, so that abscesses heal quickly; and if abscesses grow hot, let him leave it for a day until the abscesses calm down; then make it equal to the bone which you can easily and wisely move; and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are pieces; then bind it as needed afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 If there are fractures in the bone, separating it into two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or a small member, or tendons, or one tendon and the hand; then arrange the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are disjoined, you align all the pieces to their proper places with every tool at your disposal, and ensure through your work that no injury or pain comes to the patient; then properly join the two bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not good; straighten it carefully, and do not strain it too much, nor force it as those who make abscesses or contractions in the member through their work do, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limbs are set in place, you should punish the patient so that he does not move them, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and keep a close watch to ensure that the limb is secure and feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For if it feels no pain, it is not set in place, and you must put it in the proper position so that it feels no pain; and beware that it should be properly aligned, for twisting may come when it is restored, and the quality of a broken limb depends on this.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are various in smallness and in largeness and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small members such as arms and fingers: you should wrap them in thin linen cloth; and for large ones such as thighs and legs: you should wrap with a broad, hard string, because the large strings embrace the entire large member evenly, and keep it equal on all sides, so that there is no swelling; then wind three or four turns around the limb lightly, and hold one part of the string with your hand, then go above the break and tighten slightly, less than the break, then move away a bit from the break; and soften the string little by little, until you take a large portion of healthy tissue, then take another string, and turn it around the broken limb in the opposite direction; then return to the part below the break, and tighten moderately, not too strongly or too loosely, as we have said in the first instruction above; then put between the strings cotton wool or linen until they are all equal, then tie them all together and then place well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is a boil or abscess, place on it a calming substance for the abscess that is hot, and also remove the boil, leaving it in this state for several days; then hold over your steels (i.e., metal instruments), and they should be about half the size of a thick cane, or of a rod used to make splints, or of palm branches, and they should be shaped as follows:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But the steel that one places on the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as is necessary for the member, whether small or large; then hold over your steels in the same way as you did with the first fracture, then tie a cord above it so that it follows the same pattern; make it tighter at first, but gradually less tight; and the cord should not be too thick or too thin, and should be of flax; for if the cord is too thick, like I have seen in the work of fools who make their ropes from twisted flax, and that is a great error, because the fracture will not heal evenly if it is too subtle, and it should never have less than two fingers' width of space between each steel.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is impaled by the points of the splinters after setting a fracture in healthy bones, put linen or canvas padding under them so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with breaking and the ligaments are torn, I will tell the cure after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to set a splint for all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limbs are large, no need to apply hot irons for less than five or seven days, according to your certainty of the abscess healing; and here is the ancient method for restoring fracture, dislocation, and twisting: it is that you take flour kept near the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thick nor too thin, and let it dry, and this is the common method for the plaster restoring a fracture in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of making a plaster to heal fractures, dislocations and twists: take alum, radish juice, sulfur, asafetida and Arabic gum, mix .x. parts; add mastic and aloes, .v. parts; eight parts of camphor; then make powder, and mix it with egg yolk; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another plaster method for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 9 parts; sagebrush 6 parts; Armenian bole 10 parts, grind well, and mix with vinegar or plenty of egg, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way of dislocation treatment for joints and bones displaced from their places, relieving the pain that occurs, and trimming with bone cutters and breaking: take new linen, wet it in warm water and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not restore [the limb], but it is good for relieving abscess heat and bone pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of plaster to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground up earth-parsley, mix them together and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way of plaster for the setting of broken bones and promoting wound healing.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of beans, each a part; grind them and mix with wine, and if the member is scalded, mix with moist coriander water or vinegar, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (medication) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of mallow, linseed, balm, medick, and burnet, and flowers of violets and camomile, altogether one part; grind, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book not to put anything on a broken limb for restoration except wax made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he states that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that something dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, should be put on a broken limb for restoration, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat wounds and pain is: take crushed mugwort and hops, or feathers of birds, and mallow, and equal parts, grind them together, and make a poultice with the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then let it heal a little after that, and make sure the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not let it heal for many days. If pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and let it heal, and remove the emplastrum immediately; and take a light cloth, and sea sponge wet, and dip in water, and cleanse the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is alleviated; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie over a nut, as long as you are sure of abscess heat; and let the inflammation of the member rest, and the pain be removed, then continue the subtle cure, and a little emplastrum, and not to strain it too much as before; and make it subtle until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, and painful, and you need plaster and linen, start it again as you did initially equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if no swelling comes to the limb from what we have said, do not dislocate it unless after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it twenty days, as one sees, until the fracture heals and the joint approaches the flesh again; then hold it more tightly than before, and fatten its meat, as I said before; and if you see the joint drying out too much, know that nourishment cannot enter therein; therefore give hot moist heat to it every time you dislocate it, and this should be done daily and slightly loosen the bandage; by this means cut off the swelling from the limb, and correct immediately what the foolish doctor does, who keeps the limb twisted: it is harmful, and it is a dangerous procedure, and I see no other remedy than to rest and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	In various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many types of fractures exist, and they have various shapes; for there are some fractures caused by sword impact, breaking the entire bone from its shaft which is beneath the bone, as happens in a cleave or split; and because of this, this type of fracture is called "cleaving" or "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	or if the sword strikes the bone from above and penetrates through, it is called this type of breakage "absolute"; and the wound caused by these two types of breaks can be either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a deep bruise or cut, or arrow wound, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the wound is deep enough to reach the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if the wound is re-opened in the bone as thin as a hair, and the fissure is small, it is called this type of fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by hitting with a stone or falling, or by something similar, causing the bone piece to enter below; and the joints are pointed like blacksmiths when they make over the kettles; the pieces of metal go inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more to those who have a moist bone in the head, such as a child's head; and it happens in all these ways of fracture when small bones are dislocated, like teeth; and I will speak about it further.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breaks by pulling on them, and the examination by probing, and the corruption of the flesh that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairy appearance is known by those who, when the bone is exposed and rubbed on top, causes the break to open black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be aware of the patient's symptoms; if you see any bad symptoms such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, paralysis, high fever, hairs emerging and reddening, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any doubtful symptoms, and you hope for salvation, start the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the frostbite comes to you for the first time, in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the events that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the bone fracture reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, you must cut the affected area as follows: take hold of the child's head and expose the bone in all ways possible, and over the wound's figure as much as possible, and if blood or pus comes out while exposing the bone, or abscesses form, help with what is needed; fill the cavity with damp cloths soaked in rose oil, let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be sure that there is no more bleeding; then begin to remove the bone, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is to make a straight cut before, and it forms a shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And put another, larger incision next to the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is to have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made with iron tools; work carefully so as not to pierce the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is dislocated and hard, you should perforate it around [the area], so that you can administer splints with wedges, not penetrating more than the bone near the tip, and above the point there should be a margin or circle that prevents the tip from passing beyond the bone; and you should have several of them, so that each one comes to the appropriate place on the bone's thickness, so that you have splints for all [the parts]; and this is the shape of the four types of splints:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for perforating around the broken bone is that you place one splint on the bone, then turn your hand until you feel that the bone has been perforated; then move the splint elsewhere a little afterwards, and do this all around, then cut the space in the bone between the fractures as subtly and lightly as possible, and as delicately as we have said, so that you draw the bone to your hand, or any of the tools you have like pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the protrusion which remains of the bone to any other similar instrument resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors; and if small bones or scales remain stuck, do not leave them, gently remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with ointments and bandages as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work is that which the Gauls say, who are very wise; and it is praised much, and these are its words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture moves open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath it this lenticular incisure (as shown in its form):
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 Do not cut through only one side, and make the incision in two parts, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer from above to break the bone all around, and be careful of the fabric underneath; if it is adhered to the bone, remove it gently because you can injure the bone senselessly without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the cloth and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then after that roughness, remove the scales with a sharp rasp, using different amounts according to each place, in order to bring about the most suitable smoothing, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If the king shaves with great razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and never ceases to do so until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you apply the remedy according to his guidance; this is not something that can be answered by him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the wound is open, you should take a linen cloth of the appropriate size for the wound, wet it in rose oil and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled over once or twice, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so as not to burden the wound, then administer more linen through the other side but do not strain it any more than it covers the wound only; leave it like this for a day or two until the abscess subsides, then remove it and administer medicines such as marshmallow root, oatmeal, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and apply it to the wound and immediately administer unquestionable medicines without bitterness; ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any dressing or pus on it, as when pus accumulates on the cloth of the brain, it will rot and cause great harm to the patient; for when something bitter is placed on the wound, it will cause pain through the other side.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care that no bad accident befalls the patient as we have said, it is doubtful with uncertainty.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness does not come violently except by the medicine that has been placed upon it, its virtue being such, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them with beeswax; then anoint it thusly. Then cure it in the manner of cures as is necessary, until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck are broken above, or one alone, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If one of the two parts is broken, you should chew your little finger or thumb nail, and put the same break inside your index finger, and in the pocket outwardly, until the nail grows again according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the breakage is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach the place, then you must place it equal to the top of a ruler, a little larger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If the break is of one of the two parts, do as before, and hasten to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has calmed down, then put linen strips at the base of the nail where the break is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply a bandage on the other side, if there is only one fracture; and let the cloths be as thick as they fill the wound of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said to any restorer that one must soften the tendons with butter, and move each one every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem good to me, but it must be softened with an egg yolk mixture and flour powder; then let the tendon rest until the bone is hard and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers of geese are placed instead of stitches, and if one piece of cloth surrounds them, and the breakage is held, the patient is blown upon with breath; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If abscesses come to the wound while you are working on it, place either alum or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of turmeric.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there is no abscess present, apply a plaster from flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put light packs on it and do not bind too tightly; and if the break in the nail is small, and it breaks into many small pieces, extract them using appropriate tools, then seal the wound, and treat it with char, and solder, as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose; and if there is no wound within the nail, cure the tendons and put willow sticks on it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated beneath and there is no wound outside, and only the break is outside but not broken in two, if one knows it slightly, it indicates that it is corbeled inside.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side of the jaw, insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, place your index finger of the right hand inside, and gently push the break inward and align it with the other hand from outside.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is separated into two parts (i.e., diastasis), you must provide two parts of extension until it is equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or rupture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a broken cork over the mandible, and put on one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large and well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and attach it where you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and encourage them to eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then reset to its original state; place a plaster over it with flour from the mill mixed with egg or meal of wheat; after removing the cork; and put a light linen plaster over the plaster when it dries, and if the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess arises, bring what we have said before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, observe that no piece of the bone has been removed; if it is necessary to remove the broken part, do so with subtle tools suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, stretch it by fire as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once all the pieces have been removed and none are left, stitch the wound if it is wide, and place one plaster suitable for this purpose on it to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is in four ways: it is fractured and dislocated in two, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when there is a fracture with an open wound, that you have two assistants: one holds the shoulder where the forceps are broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then align the fracture to your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither deformation nor dislocation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if more extension is needed, put a round cushion of cloth or linen under the shoulder of the patient, and make it as large as necessary; stretch and tie the bandage, and hold the cushion in place with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you cannot draw out the head of the splint from below because it is lodged in place, then have the patient lie on his side, and put a small pillow under the shoulder. Then push the shoulder downwards, so that the bone of the splint is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the break to your fingers and if you find debris, then it should be cut open. If the pieces cannot join due to any reason, hit it at one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the splint, to prevent it from flying out.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it seems like a spoon, and is not hollow, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and there should be two cuts, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, as the opening of the wound when you have treated the bones; and when you are sure of the abscess cold, if it is shallow, or you doubt about the abscess cold, use linen and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	If the abscess becomes cold, moisten one linen cloth in rose oil, asafetida, and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone when it has wounds and cuts, is that you put a plaster made from milled powder and egg yolk on the bone, and place light splints on top, and place a spear under the affected area if needed; then take a very wide bandage, a palm wide, then cover the splints with two layers of linen, and apply the plaster; then take a thin stick, 3 feet long and wide, and wrap it around that wide bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang; and place the stick over the broken bone, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the affected side, and under the healthy side; and tighten each part separately, and when you see that the broken bone aligns correctly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then keep it in place every day, and when the linen loosens, tighten it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the affected area to lift the shoulder up; this will help the collarbone to heal along with the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except for bad accidents occur, until 20 days; then start applying the plaster again if needed, and tighten it and leave it in place until it is healed; and it is healed in the most cases within 28 days, and in less time with some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 It happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated and cannot be felt except through touch; if it appears according to the shape of the break, you must reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways; then put powder from the mill on it with a lot of egg and light wads, and place a double cloth over it; then place a wide and subtle awl, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there are any hollows in the shoulder under the awl, use linen wads to fill them so that the awl fits evenly; and then tighten it all with a great firm bandage, so that the awl does not move from its place, and watch it every day; and whenever it swells, tighten it and adjust the awl if it is out of its place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is reached, release it, for it is not bone that easily moves out of place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a part of the bone protrudes before and not under the skin, lift it up, extract it, and do what we have said to treat an abscess at the shoulder joint with warm cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break in the thigh
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The broken bone is sometimes fractured in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is fractured at the end, it tilts downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of nourishment, and soon, and by chance vomits blood, and the openings in the broken bone are exposed, and he feels no relief.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you place one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and carefully align it in all ways, until the figure of the bone is as required; then you place splints and padding over the thin part of the broken bone, or a lighter staff, and wrap it in one bandage, and hold it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around to the back, and tighten it gradually, and check every hour whether the bandage has softened, if it has softened, you tighten it; and if it is necessary to unwrap, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and undo it, remove the padding, and direct those who have come in matters of care; then rewrap the padding, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large ones after the back, and at the chest within, and they do not bend easily except because they are slippery; and this is well known at the investigation of the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the resetting is to align the fracture as needed.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then place the splint and tie it with a stick if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is displaced downwards, the patient feels very great pain and swelling, as in pleurisy, because the bone points to the skin; and it swells at the ends, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have applied many devices.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And to those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which swell the belly, for pushing out the rupture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	But we do not do so, that hot abscesses come, if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, he is cured.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And it was said to someone that vents (tubes) should be placed on the head, for draining pus, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the tubes will attract excess fluid to the head due to its weak position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it was said to someone that the head should be covered with damp linen in hot oil, and tents (something like small bags or pouches) should be placed between the ribs to make the wound even around it, then let it be treated with a cure for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the broken rib, and there is doubt in the patient, it is necessary to break through the side of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument under it for support; then you should cut open the bone, pull it gently, and sew up the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess swells up, place soft, oiled linen cloths on it and on the affected area; and treat the affected area as needed for the abscess, and keep the patient lying down on the side where it is, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never does a fracture occur in the bones of the neck or spine, and it rarely bends.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, take notice if their hands become softened, swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel anything.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is fatal in many positions, and if they do not speak or feel when you tighten and prick them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient should be healed if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if a similar thing happens in the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are paralyzed, and if the accident that has occurred is in hands, and the back shows sudden movement without will; and when it is put on its stomach, it still moves without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is placed on its back and it wants to lie down, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is deadly; do not treat it.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is to apply hot poultice if there is an abscess, then put rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is soothed; then put one of the comforting and drying plasters on top and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone dislocates, it should be covered with oil; extract the bone, then sew together two lips of the wound if it is large, with a stitch; then treat the wound with soothing balm until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken (which is called "head of the cow"), put your hand on it from the left side, and align it with the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and the linen cloth on top, if you need them; then bind it, and if there is any bone dislocated, make it straight, extract it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the pelvis
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the pelvic bone is fractured, there will be a slight decrease in the head, and it will elongate and bend towards the opening, causing pain at the site, and swelling of what is fractured.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, as long as you are over the fracture; and feel which part is fractured and the shape of it; and if the fracture is only at the head, then make the fracture equal, as natural.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it bends towards the inside, then make the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place the splint upon it, then place a rod or stick on top and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and immerse the limb beneath the ribs until the fracture is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess has come to the surface, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and place what we have said before on top of it; then return to treatment, hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the chest and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways; of which one is that you take a splint made of thicker material, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulders with two ropes, and bind them from above, and place the patient on one seat; then you cast the broken arm upon the splint, until it reaches the elbow, and have a protrusion of splint in the middle, then bind it above to any heavy object or the assistants extend it downward; then the healer equalizes the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another manner is that you hold the patient on their bed, and hold their hand to their neck, then command two servants that one holds the place above the break with his hands, and the other holds below at every joint, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 If you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the ligament below the break, and above the break, and extend each of the assistants to their respective places.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 If the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must put the ligament in the middle below the joint, and the other towards the costal arch, below the break; and if the break is towards the costal arch, you must slightly put the ligament without effort, so that the break is equal to its place, and to the costal arch; then equalize the break as necessary, and hold it, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess swells up, do not tighten it for more than 7 days, but put soft linen and rose oil on it to calm the abscess; then you can tighten it. The method of tightening is that you place the clamp on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; then pull the cloth tight on the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in its socket, unless something prevents it, or the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stitches; place a larger and stronger splint above the break, with one inch of space between each stitch, and make sure each stitch is large enough to pass over the break from both sides; then hold the splint in place as I have said at the beginning of the chapter concerning the break, more tightly and lessen in width.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the swelling and constriction, as we have said, when you restore a broken limb, and you doubt whether it is an abscess heating up, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then examine it every three days to see that no pus or redness appears at the site, or that the blood does not come to the limb because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If you notice that the swelling and constriction disappear within three days after your initial examination, as we have said, then...
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such incidents occur, do not remove the bandage for less than three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back with his hands on his stomach; put a clean linen sock over the shoulder and observe every hour of the day or night that the appearance of the broken limb does not change or the bandages become soft; if the injury heals by the power of medicine, give the patient the meat as we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the meat is initially tender; and when it begins to regain its strength, let it grow.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in 40 days; and then you must release it and administer baths and ointments to guide its healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the dislocation is crooked and swollen, it may take a month or two to release it.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius," the former being small and forming the forearm's outer side, while the latter is larger and lies beneath it near the elbow; by chance, only the large ulna breaks, or both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When small fractures are broken, the restoration is easy, and healing quick; but when large ones are broken, healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only the small fracture is broken, it should be gently extended and made level.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large fracture that is broken, it should be pulled more forcefully; and stretch it on the splint, and hold the handle of the hand higher than the others, and the small one lower than the others, and cross the patient over himself, and the splint in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the attendants arms to the part below his hand or elbow, and one other attendant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then make the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage of bones, place each one back in its place, and if none is displaced that points to the center, and you cannot restore it to its place, then saw off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking open, I spoke of it in the singular chapter, take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 If pusples (abscesses) arise at the beginning of healing, apply a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and stick the plaster gently over it until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the wax, and apply a poultice of milled powder with plenty of egg, then place the sticks; let the stick for breaking be stronger than the others and a little larger; and know that it should have six sticks or more in various positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and tighten more above the break than elsewhere, and always less when pulling, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the drapes over the break be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the threads, with which it is tightened, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And watch the member and the ligament afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that happens on the member, you must anoint the member with warm water until the itching is soothed; and do not let the member rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Then continue with the binding, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, or similar things, address accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too narrow, you must soften it a little, and let it be for some days until the swelling subsides, and then set it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things mentioned above happen to the patient, do not remove the bindings for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 Furthermore, you should place his hands at his neck, and ensure his neck is even, and watch for movement or dislocation; he should sleep on his back. Know that this fracture will be restored in thirty to fifty days, or perhaps twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the remedies.
de la brisure de la main	Of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	The fracture of the hand occurs frequently in the back of the hand and the fingers, but only a few breaks occur at the wrist.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or fractured, the patient must cross their arms and sit upright in a straight position; then place their hand on an extended cloth, and extend the broken bones, aligning them with mirrors until they are well set; apply the plaster and bandages, unless abscesses appear, then put a splint according to the size of the break; and swaddle it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is around the palm near the abdomen, make a splint from cloths and instruct the patient to wrap it around their broken hand; then tie it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as wide as the palm of the hand, and tighten it as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the outer side (of the bone), it is necessary that you place a splint above and another below in the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break occurs in any of the fingers, equal it as necessary; and hold it with the sole and, if you see, place a small straight splint to lift the break and keep it from moving; and if the break is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, equalize it, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or bind them all together in one holding, for movement is harmful, or place a splint on it, as with a finger; and take care in the restoration and the placement of the abscess, and treat those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when it twists forward and backward; and restoration is such that a ligament is tied above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patients lie on their faces, then each of the ministers extends his ligament equally to its equal part; and this is when the break is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the fracture is near the root of the leg, it may be one of the ligaments towards the heel, and the other ligaments below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if it is near the knee, then the ligament is below the knee and the extension is distal; then place the hands on the bone so that it is equal to its two sides, as naturally, and then set the splint and the bandage, unless an abscess comes in.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool down first, then return to your work and treatment; the ligation is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 You must wrap above the fracture with a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and remove any excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and thread the string through the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the string above; then turn the leg and the bandage upward, then place splints on the fracture and a splint on the bone of the leg; then use soft fabric for seven inches between the leg and the thigh to set the strapping evenly, then begin to bind three or four turns around the fracture; and as you go higher above the fracture, let it be less constricted. Then take the two strings that you have threaded through the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return to below the head of the string, until you reach the foot; and bind so that it does not move from its place, then leave it in this state, unless an abscess or swelling or any such thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is a fracture, loosen it and direct the pieces as we have said many times; and if there are bone fragments that protrude, they must be removed if possible; and if not, the fracture should be opened and drained; and treat it as we have said until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the leg is broken in such a way that stakes are set, as in the shoulder or arm; however, during the restoration process, the patient does not feel any pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the leg is restored in about a day, or slightly less or slightly more, according to the various complexions [of people].
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street of genoails
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the groin region, there occurs little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not a simple crack, but rather a tear or wound that causes pain at every place and great pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one equalizes what is uneven in its ends, as much as it can be assembled; then place the splint, and put a round stick if needed, and tighten it as required, then inspect all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, such as abscesses and others; apply to each accident what is necessary for it, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called "ham" and the others are called "shin"; and it breaks in the same way as it does in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the work is the same. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone (tibia) is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it turns under.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Therefore, provide extension, make it even, and align the limbs equally; however, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust accordingly to your judgment.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two splints of wood that will support the leg from both sides and be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap them with two bands, one above and one below, and bind it in the middle so that the leg cannot tilt to the right or left, and this is good; nor should anyone apply a splint of wood longer than the length of the leg, and place it under the leg as a restraint for movement, and properly make it at the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; treat it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the bone fractures in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no fracture, but sometimes the bones of the foot do have a fracture and nothing else except for a slight crack in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture in the bones of the foot and you see the bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if he were walking, then place your own foot over his, where the raised bones are, press hard until they return to their place; put splints and bandages on, and put a small flat table under the patient's foot with two hollow holes, then tighten it around the foot evenly; when you have wrapped cloths around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when four or five days have passed, undo the linen, for you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two [shoulders] are broken, restore them as we have said about the arms of the hand; then place a splint on the broken shoulder according to its length and let it be slightly larger, then place beneath the arm that tabula I mentioned, and hold it in position; and if there are 2 or more [broken], break each one separately, place a splint on each according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the tabula beneath the arm; and let it be so that the tabula is placed above the belly of the arm, facing towards the back, so it covers well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, after what we have said; and treat each accident as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman's nature (pelvis) is broken, make her lie with her back enlarged, then incline her to the part of the small of her back and hold her from behind; then fill the cavity of the patient with cotton and stuff it as full as possible; then move the woman and lift her lower back little by little, and when the cotton comes to the entrance of the pelvis, let the bone come out with the stuffing; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or longer: the fracture will be healed, and if you see, take a bladder of barley, tie one end of a cord to it, and push the whole bladder into the pelvis; then blow forcefully into the cord until the bladder swells inside: the pelvis will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the thumb of man is broken, either of woman, restore it as we have said in the hing joint; and such breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and his craft to it and intends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For the fractures indicate various positions for the right way of restoration; understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In a spear (shaft), when it is broken, take an owl's throat and insert the shaft; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for 3 or more days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For the one who has a breakage with a wound (especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder), he must be bandaged now, just as the bandages that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, then treat it with vinegar (if you have nothing else), then immediately proceed to set the breakage in that same hour or the following day, unless an abscess has come forth.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess has come forth, then wait until the ninth day, allowing it to heal before touching or working on it again, for doing so would cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and appears above the knee joint, you must put it back gently into its place with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the fractured bone does not align to put it back into place, you must use this tool which is made of iron, about 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the mirror that he grips 3 or 4, depending on what is needed in each bone-setting; and it should be round and a bit large, so that it does not bend during your work on the limb, and pointed at the tip, and large from the middle forward, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palm joint," for which the crooked head of the bone should be placed on top of the obvious bone, and push it once, until it comes back and becomes even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot well take the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Afterwards, immerse the linen in black, sticky vinegar and apply it cleanly if it is warm; do not put any scorched cloth or oil on the wound which may bring rot and corruption; then administer oil when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open, cover it with a layer according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times have the foolish surgeon done this, and brought death or corruption upon the patient, and beware that the bindings are more gentle and softer than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad incident may come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put stitches on it; but instead wrap around it, in place of stitches, hard cloths and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And if the next day or two after the application of the poultice you see it swell at the wound, remove what you put on it and apply healing ointments for wounds such as healing balm and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be set in such a way that the bone slips slightly downwards easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but slides back, as there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you try to keep pressure on the wound and remove all the loose fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula appears at the place or any other kind of corruption, you must treat it according to what is said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And if the bone is broken and open above the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bones, and similar in other large members, do not draw it out because many times death comes, but leave it until it can be drawn out; perhaps it will come out by itself after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; otherwise, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The arriving bruises on the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	There are often many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is unpleasant to see the appearance of the limb member; and by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural duties.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, be careful: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, such that you take any of these things or all together, and crush them with a sharp wine or with plenty of egg white or with oil; then put it on the wound in poultices, and bind it well, and do not unbind it for many days; and then break it open, and start another one, as long as the nodules are removed; or you bind above a piece of plank well made; because the properties of plank are that they remove all swellings from the limbs. And if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut off the top, and make the excess apparent; or you shave it at any razor, as long as it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The member which is weak after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after treatment, the members are weak and delicate in many cases: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many sutures, and the nourishment could not reach the member; or because of excessive drainage; or because of excessive movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, which makes them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body thin, until the blood multiplies in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and comfort; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts great nourishment to it, and drain it often with cold water, until the nourishment goes to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless do not lose hope; do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this treatment is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the swelling and torment are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with hot, soft water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, radishes, mellilot root, and similar things; and you make a soothing poultice, such as dyaquilon; or you take figs with fat, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Bring movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is swollen and hardened, just like stone, and it requires iron to be removed, then it must be covered up to the bone, incised carefully with a subtle instrument; and cloth and bandage should be applied in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to someone, it must now be returned without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if one delays, the joint swells, and by chance if it is set in place again; therefore, it should not be moved when it is swollen: many times it causes pus and other pain; however, when this happens, let the patient purge himself, then leave him, until the abscesses have all subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently straighten it, and cure each member as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters concerning shoulder dislocations down to feet.
des mandibules	of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It rarely happens that jawbones should be dislocated in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and saliva flows from the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, wrapping its tongue around with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When small dislocations occur, they return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it, and do not linger; and in such a way that the attendant holds the patient's head, and pushes one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other hand should be open, to put them equal; and command the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he shall bring it back into its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it [the dislocation] is reduced with force, most certainly it will recur, especially if they are the two jawbones together, anoint them with hot water and oil, until they are gently reset; never force to reduce it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are reset equally, the patient's mouth should be closed with soft linen cloth soaked in a ointment made of rose oil and wax, then it should be tied gently with several ligatures; and the patient should sleep on his back, and his head should be kept between two cushions so that it does not move neither to the right nor to the left, nor it forces itself to move, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed; then eat lightly whatever he wishes, and do not force himself to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their places, fever and accustomed sores come, and possibly rupture of the belly, and possibly the vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a disaster; and many times he who experiences it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	Of the noose
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The noose cannot dislocate from within its continuity and the ribs, and it is occasionally dislocated outwardly, and one can feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 Then the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; then presses the shoulder with your hand in a certain way, and it will return; then apply the splint and bind it, and hold it in place; the head that is turned towards the side cannot dislocate again; if it does, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the splint and bind it, and keep it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and similarly, the shoulder of the back can be reset when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	The dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways: one way is when it dislocates at the socket below; the second is at the hip part; and by chance, it dislocates above the hip part, but this rarely happens; it does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for it returns quickly to its place; in those with enough flesh, it jumps back quickly, but returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some men, percussion or breaking, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you should verify [the dislocation], as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that the dislocations, when they are below towards the socket, distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and at the head of the shoulder, there will be a hollow, and beneath the shoulder at the toucher the head of the shoulder, just like an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor can he move in any way; and similarly, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it at the toucher; and this type of dislocation is not easily corrected when it is new, unless the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is that the minister raises the patient's hand up, then puts his thumbs under the dislocated joint and pushes it upward to its place; the minister then lowers the hand and places it down, it will come back quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if the shoulder does not come back as we have said in our hands after several days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and bring a soothing and calming poultice, such as a decotion of elderflower, fennel and lentil in water, and apply this; then lay the patient on his back, and place a piece of equal linen under the affected shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the hand on the linen, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the arm of the patient; another attendant holds the head of the patient still so that it does not move downward; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see it dislocate again in this manner: it is necessary to have a person present who is larger than the patient; and be straight toward his side, and push his shoulder under the patient's affected shoulder, and lift the affected shoulder upwards, so that the patient hangs from it; another attendant pulls the patient's arm downward towards his stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, he can carry no heavy thing with him, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Also, one may reset it in another way: one thrusts the long needle into the ground so that the head is as round as a pea and not too thick nor thin; then it shall be placed under the patient but with soft fabric over it, and the patient should be standing upright; then extend the hand away from the other side forming a "V"; the jointure will return to its place quickly. If it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, perform this cure: take a thick needle of about two fingers in length and four inches wide, which has a round tip for inserting fully into the socket, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay the rod over the patient's shoulder, so that it does not prick the patient; then place it under the shoulder of the patient; extend your arm along the rod; hold the limb on the rod and the arm at the wrist, then place the arm on one side of a small bench with enough space for the hands to be placed underneath; extend the other hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side; the joint will re-align itself in the process.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	When the joint is in place, regardless of how it may be, you must place a spherical pad of wool under the shoulder; then apply the plaster made with powder from the mill, incense, and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then press down on the shoulder underneath while turning the string around the plaster, and tie the hand to its neck, keeping the hands in place.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be applied ointment, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal sooner; and afterwards apply more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or for some other reason, then you must administer cauteries at three places, as it is stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm above, then know that the nerve at the base of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the thighs and hips, or backside, is made by a push and extension of hands, and other force is applied to it; and care should be taken until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes stiffness in the member and delayed movement; the patient should use baths many times, until the stiffness subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and it returns to its points; and if it has dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and dislocation cannot be restored because it can clearly be seen and felt; and it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the broken bone with the healthy one, you should see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is swollen and the arm cannot bend nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset the dislocation as soon as an abscess comes, for if an abscess comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely set again, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death may come.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such, when it can be returned in this manner, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and the hands of the patient according to the cut thereabout, both above and below, and push the joint to its sockets together, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when the patient doubles their hand over their hand, and pushes the root of the displaced palm back into place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 If it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and it is that two people extend the arm and burn it with two torches so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, and when you have wound a double large cloth around it; and when the mirror has joined the joint to his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns; and when it is in place, put dry plaster over it with egg, hold it strongly and let the arm hang on the patient's neck for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is closed in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint does not bind well, renew the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like that for some days until it is firmly set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if there is pain after the repositioning of the joint and it becomes motionless, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you may put a sheep's wool soaked in warm, moistened dung on the jointure, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let it enter the water again; and when it seeps, rub the jointure gently, then replace the wool, and then enter it into the water again; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, put warm, moistened hay on top of it, and press it; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is displaced and the repositioning is easy, more so than other joints; it should be returned to its place as quickly as possible, in the hour itself when it is dislocated, unless the ligaments are inflamed or there is an abscess hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then the repositioning of the hand is done by placing the sick hand on a table, and extending the fingers of the attendant's hand, and aligning them with it, so that his palm is above the appearance of the jointure, and he pushes until it returns to its original position; it is necessary for you to observe if it is well in place; then have the patient place the back of his hand on a table for stretching and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the attendant places his hand above the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, it is good; if not, hold down the pressure on poultices for abscess easing and let the pain resume.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If the patient cannot endure it and you are unable to put it in place after some days, the dislocated joint remains; this does not harm the patient as long as the hand is injured and cannot be straightened completely: thus know that the nerves have been severed or the arteries; there is no other means of help except by applying a cautery to ease the case, and in case it may be of any use.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is healed, place it in a splint as we have said, then strap and leave for 5 days, then release and leave it in this state.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well and there is no swelling, moist with warm water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Whenever the fingers of the hand are dislocated on either side, or on the back of the palm or stomach, then stretch the dislocation back into place as much as possible, then hold the finger's head and turn it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then straighten it on that day; and bind it as we have said, and loosen it from day to day, and make it move, and relocate it; and do this often, until it becomes narrow, and similarly do, if it is dislocated on the stomach side of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and similarly do, when it is dislocated from another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The dislocation of the vertebrae in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebra of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, there is no remedy, for death quickly approaches the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are such that the hernias jump spontaneously, cannot be held, and many times the member becomes softened, or the two knees or the two arms or the back; when it becomes silent at four parts, it is called "gilbositez"; treatment is that you look to see if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if not, there is no cure nor healing from then on.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those that fall or are caused by blows or similar things, the old methods of cures used to speak in great words, but there is not much benefit; I have abridged it according to my understanding, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the hernia that comes before, there is neither tool nor healthiness; and similarly, the one that comes directly between the two sides, which cannot be cured except by him who comes from behind, as I have said; and it is that the patient should lie on his back in an even position, and have a restraint under him, so he does not bleed; then insert the iron [cautery] into the first opening in the ground, and the other at the feet, and tie a rope above the patient's hips, and another at the thighs, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two cauteries; and they should be well closed, the cauteries as we have said, and the ministers place their hands on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if the dislocation does not return through this cure, take a board that is three spans long and curved beneath, and position the patient on their side, and push the head of the board under the opening, then put the middle of the board on the spine; place your hands on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see it does not, turn the screw that twists by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And take two needles of one arm's length and place them on either side of the patient's head, leaving a palm's width between each needle; have a screw in each needle, or the lever turning, and the needles should be firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move; place a turning needle between the two needles, like linked chains, and have in the turning needles two short needles of one palm's length to turn the screw; then lie the cord that is tied on the needles to the screw near the head, and the other cord to the foot at the other screw, and each of the attendants turns their screw according to the cord, and the master adjusts the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it [the shoulder] is aligned, put on it a plaster of drying agent with plenty of egg, then press and afterwards stick a probe of three feet in length, which penetrates the site of the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine, then tie a cord, as we have said, and use the patient gently with subtle heating, until it is healed; and if anything comes at the end of the healing process, administer softening and calming medicines, along with the probe mentioned earlier; and sometimes a piece of wood is administered, and sometimes it appears in the rear spondyle of the back, and it is thought to be dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, for which one should have no presumption: perhaps death will come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is known that the shoulder and shoulder blade joints come from dislocations only, and they are not dislocated in the same way as other joints; the shoulder joint is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, front and back, more inside than out, less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when the diseased leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee is more open than the healthy one; and the diseased person cannot bend his knee in fire; and it is the joint which is dislocated due to abscess swelling that is hot, because the hips of the thigh come there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who is about to die, is that this event is contrary to those mentioned earlier.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one whose leg is straight according to the accomplishment, are that it does not double the knee due to pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one whose backside event occurs are that he cannot stretch his knee nor bend it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is in its place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are as follows: first, you should examine whether the dislocation is old and if it stays in place according to its position, there should be no treatment; and there should be no presumption that it can heal on its own.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	For the fresh dislocation, which is of the four kinds of dislocation, you should hurry and turn the joint, pushing it inward and outward, moving it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, there will be no need for further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply forceful pressure, and hold the leg firmly between two hands, or tie it with a rope above the knee; and another person extends his hand in such a way that he pushes his hands under the knees, then tightens a strong rope on the thigh; and another grasps the top of the rope; and all extend upward and downward at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If the shoulder is not in place, it is necessary to treat its appearance. When the dislocation is at the front, you should remind the patient to lie on his healthy side, then tie a cord around the root of the thigh and the joint that is beneath the angle, then pull the cord upward towards the angle and towards the forceps; then take another helper with their arms, grasp the large joint of the sick thigh, and extend it forward in a wide manner; it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot lock it in the manner that we have said, then you should bind the two feet of the patient tightly with a strong rope above both ankles and both knees, and the sick leg should be extended two finger-widths more than the other; then it should be hung up by the head on a pole, and suspended from the ground by two long arms; then command one helper to grasp the head of the thigh, and another helper hanging with the patient, who will grab the thigh in a manner, because the joints return now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is out (of place), the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has dislocated his shoulder; then straighten the ligament on the affected leg properly, and also on the thigh; next insert rods, one at the head and one at the feet; then push the rod between the knees towards the patient; and place moist cloths around it to prevent the patient from bleeding; then extend each assistant away from him, and the mirror put his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it comes back (to its proper position), that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If it does not (return to its proper position), put on a bed and press as we have said in the dislocated shoulder, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately as I have said, and place the mirror on the bad angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 If the dislocation is outward, it should not be extended downward nor raised above ground; instead, the patient should be as if the hip were dislocated to the outward position, as we have said in the lying-on-the-two-hips method; and he should be on his side, and the limb extended as we have said before, and it should be pressed against the joint on the table; and he will be ready when the patient extends his legs and they are equal; then align the thighs, and place the pillow, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then unbind, and place the pillow again; and if you see that they are equal, bind as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind, and let him walk well, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside and outward, behind; and do not dislocate it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is that you make the patient sit straight, extend their leg if they can, place your back on its face, and place their foot on your feet; then take their thigh with your hands, pull apart between your hands, then bend the two sides of the thigh outwardly forming an "M"; another attendant extends their foot until it returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends the leg lightly at the knee; apply the plaster, straighten the leg to the knee, and bind them tightly for three or four days, then release it; do not let the patient walk beforehand, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of clubfoot, until it heals.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated from within and outwards.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and one tries to push it back to the dislocated part: the reduction should be gentle, and it should be gently extended with hands when only pushed out.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is fully dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and hold him by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, then to the left twice, then lift it up, and push the foot forcefully upwards; do this twice, as we have said, while pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the process, because it will return; and if it cannot return, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and firmly fix the passeil between his knees, and wrap cloths around, so as not to hurt the patient; then hold the leg by the calf, and another person holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is at the point [of dislocation], put a plaster and poultice on it, press it to form, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle, so that the bindings are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings soften, tighten them; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and advise the patient to walk for four days; and if he goes before that time limit, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess swells there, you must soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without strain, and it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table upright, put your foot above the joints opening, then press your foot firmly until it returns to its place; and when it is even and there is no gap, put a two-fingered board under the foot's heel, then tighten it, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, often the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and slow, nor hasty; first apply calming medicaments to the abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God if you see no hope of health; but when there is hope, reset the limb to its place as soon as the abscess subsides; and when the limb is in place, administer calming medicaments to the abscess again, and treat the wound, as necessary, with warm ointments; and if there is a fracture along with dislocation and small bones are displaced, break them and do what has been said for simple diseases; and beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for it harms you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your skill and body.
Amen	 Amen (Pronounced as in English)
