O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book for you which is the end of the science of medicine along with its explanation, and I have made the end by its expositions and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is confined in our region and is foreign to all things everywhere, the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have corrupted.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from these (things) has come error and vanity, and intentions have been closed and knowledge has been alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to want to revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the iron cauteries, and the other instruments of work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for them, as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who engages in this must be well-versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the function of the limbs, their forms and connections and separations of them; and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of joints, and the movement and resting places, and the direction of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates says that name without work is nothing, and the same in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We will tell you at the beginning of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, let him beware that he does not err and that he does not operate on men; thus I have seen many times more than those who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I saw a madman who cut open one abscess of scrofula (or neck) of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who pulled out a large stone from an old man, and he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it out he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another doctor who took care of a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was an injury; and the doctors, filled with ignorance, set the break above the wound using strong force and did not leave any splint on the wound, but left it in such a state; and he commanded that it should not be loosened; and it remained like that until the leg became swollen and the feet and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to loosen his leg; and when I loosened it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not heal it; and the corruption did not stop moving through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And a second eye, or other mirror, which collapses an abscess and then heats it through the malice of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a boil, when it is filled with black bile, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a position that all the corrupted matter can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: one in which there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to take care, so that the foolish may not be able to speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take care of your weapons, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and choose the best course so that by God's grace you come to salvation and be praised; and leave frightening diseases in despair of good health; and take away your weapons from that which causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can leave this world for the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of evil disease lest you be called foolish."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters concern fire cauteries and medical cauteries for agues, and the chapters are arranged from head to feet; and concerning the shapes of instruments, and iron implements of cautery, and everything necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and boring, and about blistering and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and these chapters are arranged and concerning the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from head to feet, and concerning the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are lengthy words and subtle science and secret answers; and many wise men spoke of it, and agreed with this; and they trusted little their words, for I will shorten it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, regardless of two complexions: namely, hot and moist complexion, and dry and moist complexion.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry constitution, some say that fire cautery is great aid; but others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not useful for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claim that fire cautery is great aid for hot and dry diseases in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it occasionally by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere except for those who have tested it and who know by long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and their occurrences and the time span; we are not afraid of other complexions especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all mirrors agreed and conformed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of cure, and of greater benefit than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come outside the member being cooked, and harms no other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another by spreading, and bring great pain to the sick member; and perhaps kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance does not cause this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this out by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is true regarding these matters; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of the words, because I do not like to take away the secret that is hidden or revealed by fire, nor the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstration; accept it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is fitting in every time, because the harms happening are held back by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if cauterizations are necessary for pain, except when it cannot wait for the time when greater damage does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for the illness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is not only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its quick effectiveness, and because of the virtue of its work and of its dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And sometimes the illness comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluities are gathered in him through the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauterization is administered in its place or where there is little superfluity and moisture, as in dense cauterizations for pain, and similarly, such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the rear of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth more than medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is worth noting that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not as the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	They said that gold cauteries are superior to iron ones, and they said this not without reason due to the quality of gold and its nobility; and they said that the heads of cauteries do not cause necrosis, but this is not true for all cases, as I have experienced, and found it to be true in some men; and gold cauteries are superior to iron ones, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And although you may think that you can tell when an instrument of gold is hot by its color, it may still be cool inside, and sometimes it becomes cold; and if heated too much, it will become red-hot; thus there are many difficulties in this matter.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery, which has been prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered you this chapter on the head from neck to feet, because the veins will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is effective for both moist and cold conditions of the brain, and it can be used to treat a disease called "soda", as well as many humors that descend from the head into the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed all illnesses caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode (a term for brain swelling), apoplexy, and similar conditions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, cleansing the head four or five times, according to what the qualities and age and the habit of the sick person can tolerate; and then, after the patient's head, perform the procedure.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a low stool; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will come together, it will bleed. Warm up the cautery which is called "olivare", as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the bleeding site marked with ink, and draw it downward and pull your hand slowly while rotating; then wash your hand immediately, and return the lever if you see the bone (the little finger). If you don't see it, continue to use the cautery as I told you until you see the bone; afterwards, take a small piece of linen, put it soft cotton inside, and place it on the site, and leave it for three days; after that, put damp cloth over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterward, treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients said, when a wound remains unopened longer, it drains more; and for this reason, if possible, help it to heal faster.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that the part of the bone should be burnt as much as possible with the cautery, and then the burnt area of the bone should be reattached and healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they said to burn it so much that a piece of bone is burnt as wide as the size of a walnut, for this reason because the humors come out quickly; and the wound should be left unopened for a long time afterwards, then it should be cured and closed soon.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every respect, except for certain men who have fear; and it appears that I should let it go; for the head becomes weakened by continuous solutions in nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, and the first impression of cautery seems to be more healing and beneficial to me, and from this use I work towards a remedy together with salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the head has long-lasting chronic pain, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, oils and poultices; and if they make the cautery that we have previously mentioned, it is not worthwhile.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Make the cautery on each side of the patient's head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery called "vasselz"; it is one of three in which ventouses are placed; hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the sides of the head should be more subtle than those with which the midpoint of the head is cauterized, and this is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	In the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease extends to the oil, and the head is purged with various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases have been performed but do not help; then cauteries are applied according to two methods, that is, medicine for ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery for medicine ague is that you take a small onion and remove its skin, cut it in two, each half to be applied to one shoulder, and then make the incision where the pain is so that you can place the onion under the skin; and when it has been placed, press and hold it tightly for 12 hours. Then release it and apply hot mustard oil to the onion and leave the wound in this state for 2 or 3 days, then cover it with a linen cloth soaked in butter.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the onion treatment until it is healed; and if you see that this does not work, use one of the burning medicines that I have written or treat with the 10th remedy for burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is as follows. Heat the iron rod in this manner:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "clos" because the tip is shaped like a claw or has one point of curvature and has a small appearance; it should be placed on the painful area, and hold your hand and lightly press the iron a little until half of its width is burned; withdraw your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is on the outside, and draw out abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Then put cotton in oil of lard, and place it on the area for three days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine using the cautery called "cultellare," at its entire point, be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	Of emigraine (This line is difficult to translate with certainty due to its archaic language and potential abbreviations. A possible translation could be "from migraines" or "about migraines", but it's not entirely clear from the given text.)
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraines, as previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, you see that cauterization has already been mentioned in the medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and press it gently along a line half a finger's length, remove your hand once, and hold it so as not to cover the artery and not come to the bone; and beware of the jaw that does not move when eating, and the nerves should have no gaze but at the jaw and spasms should not come upon the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear, especially for those who do not know or are untrained; leave the procedure in midway; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you at length where it should be done in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you find, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two blades; this cautery is better than the one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear due to coldness does not improve with medications and other treatments as we have said in the division, and it persists, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", here is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After burning the entire sick ear, or around both places where the pain is located, move away from the ear's root about a small distance since you have marked its location; and place 10 cauteries around each ear; after healing the wound until it heals completely.
de la torture de la bouche	Torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that needs to be cured by cautery is not for those that move from the saliva, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and not to do cautery on similar things that come from scurvy and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When curing this type of torture that moves from the saliva of the eyes and purges of the head and gargarism, and it is not worth it, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another slightly farther from the temple, and the third in the corner of the mouth; place the cautery in the open healthy part, and make the cautery towards the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as far as a fist; leave the cautery until half of its curvature is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the shape of the surgeon's tool that we have mentioned is similar, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knives be somewhat larger; afterwards, cure the wound as I have previously said, until it heals.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then administer four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the head, one at the "vessel" place as we have previously said, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat accordingly as we have said before.
de litargie	The bed for the paralytic.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this ailment, give the patient large ears and round pills made of cerebrum; afterwards, anoint the head of the patient all over, and place the plaster of mustard seed (which is written or treated as an ointment) on his occiput; and this is the method of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if not, perform four cauteries on the head from the chin to the neck, leaving a space of two fingers between each cautery, and treat it as with other treatments, and if necessary, apply one cautery in the middle, and if needed, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healthy; and the cauteries that are called "olivare," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with years and as previously said; afterwards cleanse the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and 1 at the back and 4 above the spine of the neck; and if there is more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make 4 cauteries above the spine of the back; leave it until the deeper part is burned, then wash your hand; afterwards cure it until it is healthy, and remove the cautery which is called "olivare" as previously said.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cauteries except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure this, make him gargle and chew thoroughly with soft foods; afterwards hold the child in a sitting position, and apply one cautery as previously stated, and another cautery on the navel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterized area be olive-shaped as I have previously stated.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the superfluity declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cross the sick person's arms, and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply a linen strip well made, as a circle, place it around their head; then prick the linen with thorns of old goatskin, heat the linen gently over the fire so that it can be borne by the sick person; then empty the circle from inside the head and allow it to cool; perform this on the patient every week with good care until they are well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you wish to cauterize it, make multiple pricks throughout the entire cautery. This method of cauterizing reduces the brain greatly; then place damp cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes begin to come first through the signs that I have said in the division, then commence and give the patient something purifying the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, command him to lie on his back, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two fire cauterizations on the two temples where the symptoms of the eyes are at the two eyes together, or in one if they are in one; and touch all the cautery with all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and pay attention to the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making incisions in caution how to stop it; and sometimes a fire cautery or some other substance is made under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the body
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed to be above the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, fluid, mucous substances, then perform the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter: two cauterizations on the temples, two cauterizations where the eyebrows are beneath the skull bones; if necessary, cauterize carefully above the eyelid with a small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The tears of the body within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of hot cochineal; afterwards let him drink a cup of olive oil cautery and two cauteries called "clavilis" on top of each scrotum, a little under the hair; and beware of the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And here is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery called "olivare". Here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to do it [the cautery], make two [cauterizations] on the two witches as long as they are; and do not remove your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the oils are converted to the pardons (a type of wound or sore), and prick the oil, and [one] makes cauteries according to two ways: that is to say, with fire, or with a burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient on a paper with the hairs marked as if it were the fern leaf of myrtle, and the beginning of the sign should be cut into the hairs; then put moistened cotton soaked in egg white and musk oil on top of the oil, then heat the cautery to the form specified here:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have marked many times, let the area be burned; and the signs of healing for the treatment are that you see the paper recede and the hairs rise to the oil point; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for 3 days; then put moistened cotton in butter so that the burn is removed; after treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs appear and the skin becomes soft, then begin the fire cautery on the same place again, as you did before; and if the hairs curl up, cauterize it until the skin returns to its natural state, is flat, and does not produce any oil from the pores.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medical heat is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then take a parchment and draw its shape like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and hot sand, each one cubit, and grind them together well; and make it quickly, so it does not cool; then spread it over the drawn shape as on the leaf of myrtle, and put the hairs under it; if the patient has only one oil, it should be worked on one [part], and if in both [parts]; and put cotton moistened with egg white beneath the oil; and let the patient's arm be healthy and press your finger showing above the medicine, and press lightly each time the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the biting (inflammation) has passed, lift up the affected area and observe if the stone (abscess) is raised in the same way as it was raised by fire or incision; and if it is like that, it is good. If not, apply more medicine on the affected area or continue with the existing medicine until your work (treatment) is equal, and the edges are precise; then place damp cotton wool on it until the heat subsides, afterwards cure the affected area with ointment called "diaphensis" and other remedies until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be careful with your treatment so that the medicine does not harm the edges. And if the stone (abscess) becomes soft after and the hairs prick in the oil, start applying medicine on that affected area which has been properly purified, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it heals; and this is the shape of the mulleth (mullein) leaf.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hairs of humans are diverse in size and according to this your treatment should be adapted; do not deviate from the correct path for the one who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in a basin of warm water or on a piece of wool soaked in egg white or linen dipped in oil; then heat the cautery and bring it close to the fistula in the shape of a pen nib, along with the cautery itself. If you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should be like a tent; but regardless, what matters is that it is heated for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it and extract the pus forcefully; then place the heated cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the end of the fistula with oil, so as not to cause burns; place the cautery in the fat of the oil and let it corrode.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	1. If you start the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, continue the cautery again once, and if necessary, let it rest for 3 days; afterwards put soft cotton in butter on it, and apply the drying ointment until it heals, and if after 40 days it is not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king, according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand a fistula and open its opening; afterwards put one subtle camphor into the opening in the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they fill it with the quantity of one and a half plum seeds; and hold your hand firmly on the camphor, and do not let the patient move at all, until the melted plum dissolves into its oil; and it is necessary to put olive oil on the patient's cotton wool soaked in egg white or in honey: the plum resin will heal the fistula, and the wound will heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, you must administer pepper to the nose and bring the fistula back into the warm body, as required in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there appear cavities in lips, which are called "hair," and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cavities as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then boil a small cautery knife using this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly into these cavities until it reaches the wound, then cure the place with lime until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or the eye, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after it produces pus and swells and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: then you must have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron is heated to the point of penetrating it, and at its base; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	If the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after that, heat the cautery as described below so that a rod can be placed on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside quickly, keeping your hand such that the patient feels the heat approaching to the root of the tooth; after releasing your hand, repeat the cautery according to your will; after filling the patient's mouth with warm salt water, hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gums are held tight, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold or wetness, and there is no relief from heating or medicines, then it will be necessary to resort to cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is as follows: Take butter from a cow, and heat the end of an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a linen cloth, wetting it in warm butter. Place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it is cooled; do this repeatedly until its effect reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and wool soaked in cold butter, place it again on the tooth and heat a red-hot iron above the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cautery combined with fire is such that you take a dog or cat iron, and it should be thick enough so the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cauter, the form will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauter is cooled; do this often, as the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of applying the cautery, then blow hard; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauter iron as you desire, and according to what you have at hand; and this is the form of the iron:
des scrophules	of scrofulas (scrofula)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of a cold flux and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery as described below, and make two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, depending on its size, until it reaches the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days; place moistened cotton wool on top to remove the pus; afterwards, cure the area with oil of anise and turpentine until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the plaques conquer in the throat channel, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards, apply cautery to the root of the neck and be careful not to go near the throat, but only a little. Then apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and the spine, and use the one called "clavile" in our manner as described before; and treat the area until it is healed as we have said before.
de la toust	The tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of pormon are of cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the disease is old, make two fire cauterizations on the forearm; and there should be another cautery placed between the two breasts; and let it be the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the shape as previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you wish, make a puncture cautery using the tip of the cautery called "point" with the shape previously described in the ear disease; and let the point be up to 30 or thereabouts. After curing the area as previously stated, let the cauterization be at four fingers according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make them in two applications (copies).
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After placing the patient on their back and side; after locating the cavity which is within the joint with your left hand's fingertips; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and pierce the cavity until it reaches the costal area, and the figure of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and for this reason, the cautery is made with the one that has two nerves, because the shape of the cauterization is shown by these cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has two nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes, it is tied on top of this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the caution on it, break with silk and then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	If it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then do caution on top of the thick part of the clavicle or many cauterizations in pricking. Because the joint is reconnected, and the moisture is removed and the patient becomes healthy.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients say that for pleurisy, one should perform cauteries with the roots of aractoria; and in this manner: take a long root of aractoria, the largest you can find, and let it be dry and also as big and long as your thumb; anoint it with oil, place it on fire, and cauterize one cautery between the nipple and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area beneath the beard; and two more along the fifth costal cartilage, declining slightly behind a bit; and one more at the side, and one more above the stomach, and one more between the shoulders, and two more on the sides of the ribs away from the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but proceed gently as when sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And an ancient said that one uses a cautery resembling .i. razor, and heats it up and places it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain subsides as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear, or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse (as we have said in the divisions of cures), and it does not help, then apply three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One method is to make four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver cautery we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be conscious on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and cut the skin that is near the mouse, where the patient's cough comes towards his left side, and lift the incisions you make on the skin according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After placing the two inflamed nerves close together so that the pores are pierced from the other side, draw the cautery forcefully out. Thus there will be four. And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery on the two nerves. After curing it when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is equivalent to the other remedies mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	After inserting the cautery into the ulcerated part of the member, heat it until it becomes hot, then remove the cautery and apply an ointment on the ulcer; this is for edema.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cauterizing does not help for edema, except in the manner known as "asclytes". When you treat it according to the ways that we have said in the divisions, and your treatment is of no use, then you must make four cauteries around the boil, one on the stomach, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one where the pain is; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the boil.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery open for a long time to expel pus, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle as we have shown before; and for the back it should be olive oil, as it has been previously stated.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in those who are edematous, and filled with citric acid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the ring finger and little finger; hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, otherwise the citric acid would be forced out, and let the cautery be in this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making .2 cauteries for each leg with the tip of the knife; let one cautery be long, located in front of the knee and the other behind it, within the leg; leave the cauteries above for a long time to cure, allowing the citric acid to settle; after healing the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	treatment of edema
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the swelling of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, while the digestive and retentive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then do one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before (cautery of the stomach), around the circle; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one subtle cautery clavile, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do a cautery on the joint, and one cautery on each isle, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are founded or more than one and are old, large, cold and corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if cauteries are made: 4 on the spine of the back, that which is completely turned backwards below the coccyx and triangularly, and 1 cautery under the buttock. 2 times;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and the face swells up, then make one large cautery on the stomach, as stated before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen, all with a long cauterizing iron; leave the cautery open for a long time. After healing, treat it until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnoisiteit which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you burn the ulcer, heat the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all over the ulcer being burned; and let your hand be there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, thus burning it clean; do this once or twice, and if there is much ulcer, cauterize each one as we have said; after the care of ointments useful until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large cautery on the bladder, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	From an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes, it is swollen and full of pus and corrupt matter, you must probe it thoroughly with great subtlety, and make sure you know its depth entirely. After cleaning the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the size of the cavity, and continue burning until the surrounding flesh and matter are burnt away, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the extent of the wound; beware not to burn the nerves nearby and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the body of the bladder and the intestines, be careful with these areas, and do not act elsewhere except in charnut, and think that it is not persistent; afterwards cure the area until it is healed, if the area is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is healed entirely; but if the matter has not been removed, then know that the area is open, and the bone is corrupted at the spot; and thus as one of those we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys and of large swelling, and it does not take on female form, then it is necessary that you perform cautery over the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cautery as we have previously said; and if we cauterize in milk, it will have four cauteries in line, and it will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and soft due to cold or moisture, and the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, and both should be as long as the little finger; and make one incision behind the back, or two if needed; and the incisions should be parallel to each other according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the kidney
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the kidney is cold and moist and cannot conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then you must make four cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the caution of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and the incisions should be parallel to each other, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the wound
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous humors sink into the wound of the thigh, and for this reason it becomes silent from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints of the limb are found to be separated, if you must cauterize the patient on the wound of the thigh with .i. cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the joint around the wound so that the wound is within the circle; and if the cauteries are like those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make four large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; and heal it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the haunch
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hollow of the haunch, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division but the cure is of no use, and the illness is old: therefore you must purge the patient from the large humors with fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After this, you make the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: either with burning substances, or fire cautery. The fire cautery is according to many ways, one of which is as follows: you perform four triangular cauteries on the hollow of the haunch, and make a good depth and width, and have space between each cautery the size of a die, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is performed in the middle on the top of the haunch, so there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize the circular cautery in the dislocation of the shoulder blade; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire shoulder blade, and all the edges of the wound are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the shoulder blade and does not reach the thigh nor the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, two cauteries should be applied where the patient says that the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle .4 fingers, on the left side a little bit; and let the cauteries be cutleries, and burn the edge of the wound; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain with 2 or 4 points, which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, do more; and if the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, apply a cautery with a cutlery or circular tool, but be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery too much so as to burn nerves and large arteries, and not to cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who made a fire cautery on the ankle bone, and they let it be for so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the foot also, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly purge of which they died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this method. // The wise will say about the hock cautery, here is how it is done, make a nail of such size as a small finger's joint or slightly smaller, and be perpendicular or diagonal between each other at a distance equal to the diameter of a nut, and the distance between each should be two fingers apart, and they should be round like nuts, and there should be one handle of iron well made; this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it up until it becomes completely red and boiling hot, and then put it on the ill ankle, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery and let it rest for four days. Then apply plaster made of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this fire cautery due to its fearsome aspect, and few know how to use it effectively; however, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured by those who can, and where it can be applied.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether it be from falling or impact or too much evacuation, or like the effects of cold matter spreading, none of these symptoms call for cauteries, except in the case of cold matter infusion.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after this, that the patient be emptied of foul pills or similar things, which are to be placed on the back, where the pain is felt, three lines marked with ink, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to the strength and quantity that the patient can tolerate; and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do 4 cauteries or 2 according to the medium-sized cautery in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they become constipated, and fear; and you find in the lower spine on the back and in our appearance which appears above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this shape.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	The first sentence to translate is: "The fire cautery increases each part of the spine. If you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing 2 or 3 lines, and let the tips be close to each other. After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, ensure that you do not administer cautery in a gumboil that is in nerve spasm."
de la dolor des jointes	"of the pain of the joints"
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	"When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that has spread throughout all members of the body and when the pain occurs in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, it is treated with cauteries as follows: make a hot iron cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:"
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary for you to prick the face of the foot, make a fire cautery all over the cautery called "point". And if pain comes up to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, make a fire cautery on each knee four times or four in each part, all over the olive oil cautery; and if more is needed, do more, but do not hold your hand too long until the fat of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pain descends to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. If the pain is in the hands, do pricks around the wrist two lines; if there remains no more pain in the fingers, do pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and think about medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge the fever, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	The dislocation of the shoulder joint due to moisture can be treated by resetting it. If it repeatedly dislocates with slight movement, you must first reset the dislocation. When resetting a dislocation, the head of the humerus bone should be pushed back into its socket. This treatment is also known as reduction of the shoulder joint.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When eruptions come in anger, and the bowels descend to the kidneys and this is new, it is necessary that when you wish to cure it, you must not let him eat that day; and he should use things which relax the stomach, so that the feces descend from his stomach; afterwards have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his flank as long as the bowels are repaired, and hold them at your sides, and sign with a mark like half of a circle above the abdomen; then heat the cautery in the shape as shown here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	And let it be white and let him pass stools. Then move the bowels back to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so they do not return; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and another one under him who holds his hands; then put the cautery over the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not burst when you make the cautery; and that you do not burn him; and that by these means the patient does not die, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. It is necessary that the cauteries for children are subtle according to their size, and those of adults also large according to their size; after three days, cure the wound caused by the cautery with butter so that the burn is removed; after that, cure other medicines until he is well, and lay the patient for forty days on his back so that the wound heals well; it is necessary that his bedding be left long, so that the bowels do not burst when he gets up to go to his chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when it wants to rise, bring a well-made bandage and keep it for another 40 days; let him have good rest, so that he should work little and take care not to fill too much with drinking and eating, and not to raise too much voice; and when he follows this teaching, he will be completely healthy. And I shall say afterwards the cure of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the wound from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When the wounds occur in other bellies and are known to not grow more, make one cautery of the right size according to its quantity and let it be burned one-third of the skin; after that cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the joint with ink and draw a line over the dislocation site, and another one away from it. Then place your hand on top of the entire cautery. However, the first cauteries are easier and more manageable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any limb, whether it is from a fall or injury, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the medicine does not cure it, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, and nature, as well as its location in terms of twisting and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, start another one immediately on top of the first, for custom dictates that the cauteries should move to the nearest limb until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	To mix (or compound) medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The mixing of medicine is sometimes greatly aided by the use of cautery, and especially so for those who suffer from illness arising from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care that the illness is in its early stages, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or linger, then perform five cauteries on the head: one at the nape of the neck, another near the front at the end of the hair; two at each temple; and one behind the ear; leave your hand long enough for the cautery to reach the bone, and so that the scorch marks come out beyond the skin so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize over the mice according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the medicine has spread all over, it will surely disappear, then you must cauterize with those cauteries we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery at the nape of the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one at the buttock and another under it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the legs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and over the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the lower back, and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cautery you do, the more help it provides and benefits [the patient]; and know that the sick do not feel pain during cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. The cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the art of ironwork. Afterward, clean the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it heals.
de enfleure	Cauterize the wound with a hot iron.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then cauterize the affected member according to its size and shape; and let the cautery be a little deeper than the thickness of the skin. Then cure it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes a cauterization is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the site of the nerve that immobilizes the limb, and in this way the inflammation is removed; but let no one interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the movement of the nerves in the body.
de albaras	From the linen cloth [or fabric]
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is recognized, and the instruments of medicine are of no use, then cauterize it with a shallow cautery, according to the thickness of the skin involved, until the blister is removed and the color changes; then cure it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, as well as pig's blood and goose blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together and bind it with a cloth; apply it to the location until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	treating canker with cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When a boil first appears and you want to stop it, you should cauterize with the cautery that resembles a circle around the boil's circumference. Although some wise men say to cauterize in the middle of the boil; however, this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen once; and a more proper thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule," as we have said in terms of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot grow
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which grows slowly due to excess or because the patient is aged (meaning very old) and has little blood, or because of the time; and you want it to grow faster: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking it; afterwards, let it be. For it will hasten to grow.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Place your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the boil, and make sure that the cautery is such that the patient feels it burning in this way so that the course of the pus is clear. Afterward, cure it completely when it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another form of illness is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a consumption of the limb, because it consumes the limbs just like fire dries out damp wood. If you see this disease in a place where it can be cauterized with fire, then heat the cautery to a small and large size, according to the location or the site of the illness; after the cauterization of all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted is removed. Then leave it for four days, and put soft soothing cauterized broth on the affected areas with oil until the burns caused by the fire are healed, and all the corruption is gone. After the cure with ointments generates healthy skin. And if you see after four days that healthy skin does not grow, it's good; but if this doesn't happen, start cauterizing again on the remaining corrupted parts. And this consumption has sometimes been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already mentioned the cure for hot medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The coming pricks to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	It often happens that a disease called "clos" comes to the feet, which is a large, hard blister that pricks the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways: fire cautery and hot water cautery. The fire cautery is as follows: you heat one cauterizer like a feather from a raven's wing, made of good iron to the size that can penetrate the nail from all sides, and it should have subtle edges; after heating it very hot on the nail, hold your hand all around the nail until it reaches the nail bed; and leave it for three days until pus begins to come out; then make a plaster of coarse herbs ground with oil, and leave the plaster over the entire area all night, and the cauterizer will dry and be pulled out by its roots. Then heal the wound with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	If the body is turned inside out by an external injury, which often happens in hands and feet, you should apply hot water cautery; and it is done as follows: take a catheter of raven or iron, or a feather from a raven's wing, and place it on the nail and hold it, that is to say, pricks the blisters; then place the catheter so that it surrounds it completely, then put a little hot water, and keep your hand firm, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the catheter reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep to the root; and let the patient suffer a little biting by the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will dry out all its roots. Do this repeatedly until you heal all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that soothe the pain.
li cure dou trembler	The Cure for Shaking (or Trembling)
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	For anyone who shakes due to coldness of the nerves, or quartan fever or another, you should apply four or five cauteries on the spinal column between each spine; one cautery in the buttocks and one on the stomach using an olive oil cautery; this will stop the shaking and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of putrid pustules (or boils)
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes, pustules that are putrid and come from large corrupted matter appear on the outside of the body. In such a case, at first when they appear, it is necessary to apply a cautery on top of each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made of myrtle stick or a long root of aristolochia, or a cautery with a lentil shape. Sometimes, they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter that comes from them is discharged, and they become healthy; however, it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great evacuations of blood from the cut artery in the wound that appears on the surface or at the incision of an abscess or the cauterization of a member, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to bleed out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	However, when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound vein and hold it very tight until the blood is stopped flowing; then apply the olive oil cauterizer (smaller or larger) as many times as necessary until it is all red; next take .i., either large or small depending on the size of the wound and the location in which the artery is severed, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cauterizer there until the bleeding has been stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a jump occurs when you place your hand on the vein, and the fire cautery is extinguished, take immediately another cautery that is near the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Continue to do this one after the other until the vein is closed; and beware not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and let no further harm come upon the patient; know that when blood stops flowing from the artery, it cannot be properly stopped when the artery is large unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated beforehand, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it that can stop the blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about the constriction of a narrow ligature or placing hot things on it, or similar things, will not benefit if it does not help.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone who has neither sight nor medicine at hand, he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it remains swollen above the wound and the vein; and he must not move it, but the cold moisture should often be applied so that it becomes very cold until the wound is frozen and thickened and remains swollen; and make inquiries in advance for the cauteries and medicines needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgeries (or heals)
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and we explained the origins and instruments and forms of cauteries; I placed that chapter on the head to the feet, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same way because those things are easier to understand when they are presented in order.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to engage in folly. For many ways of people come to treatment. Those who are so ailing with their disease that they die easily from the stupidity they find due to their illness, and from the great cruelty of its malice; and one should have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give you their advice, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the patient is contemptuous. It is not advisable that you should consent to these who come to you who have this manner, but place more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not reveal carelessly but wisely of those about which you are certain, and from which you can take and learn; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom salvation is converted; and this will help you acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Moreover, I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to that which is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have explained from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those matters from which you will need assistance.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often comes to children during birth, and when the head of the child is pressed too hard; and sometimes it happens due to a reason that we are not aware of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and for all those I have seen, death was swift; therefore, it seems to me that it is worthwhile to stop the work in some treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and it swelled each day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture collected under the skull between the brain and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out; and here is the form of the lancet:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see the fissures of the head are opened on each side, and they do not respond when you press them from within, then it is necessary that you make four cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then remove the moisture entirely from outside. Afterwards strain the cuts with linen and powder, and put vinegar and oil, and leave it in this condition until the fifth day; then unbind, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head swell gradually, and give the patient dried meat of a moist animal as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incising is that you examine the size of the abscess, and gather the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then make the incision according to what you can, and be careful not to cut the artery; and let some blood flow out, so that the patient dies a proper death due to blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarrah" in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and medicine does not help, then the last cure is the cautery on the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them (the arteries), you should have the patient lean back; then rub his neck with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's collar with one cloth; then look where the veins are, and the heads of the left and right ones are behind the ears, and they are tied down; then mark the heads of incision, then cut each one with a sharp spatula of two parts until the incision reaches the bone, but through the wide neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it (the artery), push the sharp spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting as you would through two.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it jumps up without ceasing continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when touched, you must measure the space of three fingers, then make an incision up to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be allowed to come out is 7 cubits [cubic inches], approximately a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery. Then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without swelling, if the cut that is incised does not cause an abscess, then hold the wound closed and tie it up, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old emigration comes and acute catarrh arrives, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples, and an old foolish person becomes senile with similar things; it is treated by methods of medicine, but it does not help at all. If the arteries in the temples are opened and cauterized, as we have mentioned, it will help.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hairs at the base of his temples, and listens to the opening artery in the temple because it opens well through beating. It can be easily found except in some cold men. If it is found, the patient strains its neck with some cloth, then rubs the place with a rough cloth and moistens the place with hot water until the arteries appear clearly; then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you find the artery, then pull it up to the tweezers and remove all the tissues that are under each side. If the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the scissors, then cut from that side according to the size of the two shoulders. For if it is not cut, it will not come out entirely without difficulty.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the arteries are large, it is necessary that you tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound is closed and bleeding stops; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures at that same hour, and if you see fit, cauterize the wound with the cautery knife up to the bone until the pieces are cut through; and this is the moveable work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauteries are aid for finishing the injuries: which is of greater help to the injured.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the area with old cotton and put a well-made tourniquet on top; and when you loosen them, cure it with dry medicines that cause charring, and with tourniquets, until it is healed; and if without the incision of the artery as much as you work, you hurry to cover it by cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze your hand so that the wound does not bleed; and if this is not present, put your hand on the area until it freezes, and rub the area with cold water until it stops bleeding, and squeeze as necessary; and the moveable and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery knife, but the cuts should be well spaced to keep the heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the thermometer is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should be between two knuckles, one of which is thicker in space, and when you have inserted it into the vein by two leagues, and you heat the iron hot until it reaches the bone, and then cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be spaced between two joints because it is not always welded with this cautery all over; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes run down the veins that are above the head of the face and medicine treatment does not help it, and you see the patient frowning, and notice his forehead trembling like shivers; and if they are tender and moist so that the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the ancient "contused cure", and you will do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you will make 3 cuts or evenly on the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one of the cuts shall be as two fingers all along the forehead below, and the others 2 at 2 costal zones above the eyelids, and watch out for the incision of the arteries that are at the 2 costal zones above the eyelids; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the 2 jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of 3 fingers joined.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and much linen to wipe the blood, then insert the sharp spatula of 2 parts as shown here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	The first incision is made from the temple down to the second incision; and peel off all the cartilage that is between the two cuts on top of the bone, then proceed from the middle incision down to the other second, and pull out this spatula-like instrument.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision; it is well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not sharp, and it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place the cutting edge of the instrument towards the cartilage and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision. Cut all the tendons that descend from the head to the hairs as long as the incision is continuous up to where the cartilage opens, then proceed in the middle incision down to the other opening; and then press equally on the blood and express the liquid for the blood taken; then place a piece of old cotton fabric in each incision, put moistened linen cloths soaked in wine and oil and honey on top, and make sure no pus comes out; on the third day undo the suture, and apply a large amount of cold water, then treat with ointment made of basilicon and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a sharp catarrh usually comes, and you see the hairs becoming thin and small, and the vision becomes dimmed, and paper burnt; and the hair falls out, and the head aches with acute pain, and the patient coughs; then know by these symptoms that those materials and this catarrh do not come from just one vein, but several. And the cure that is to be made if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to lean back their head, then make a large cut across the forehead and another along its length. [This means to cut from one temple to the other across the forehead.] Let your hand be far enough away from the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then insert cotton soaked in vinegar and oil between the two sides of the cut, and tie linen over it. Then place damp cloths on it and beware of hot abscesses; when it has been removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat with things that promote the growth of char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour, and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them; administer it in these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	for the draining of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, stones or similar things like iron; seeds, such as peas, beans or lentils; or flowing things such as water and silks and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear stone or some other thing that does not fit in the ear, nor enters into the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, distill a little of violet oil or camphor oil, then apply extraction; and make him sneeze with powders, and stop up the nostrils when sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear upwards. Often times pus comes from this cure; and if it does not come out, apply extraction with fine tweezers, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with tweezers, that is good; if not, apply extraction with fine and slender onion or a needle, and if it does not come out by this means, make a cane from beeswax and push the head of the cane or ear tube deeply into the ear so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out forcefully, as often times pus comes in this way; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take glue of whatever kind you have on hand, and place it around an instrument suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatnot, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump out with all these things we have said, you should hurry to incise the ear before an abscess comes, and spasm occurs; and the method of incision is that you first cleanse the patient's head and draw blood according to the measure of its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or the place it depends on; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it immediately into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is swollen and growing, administer extraction; and if it cannot be drained, administer a thin and fine probe according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	If it is swollen and growing, make an incision of that swelling. But do not do this if you think the swelling is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made several cuts; then extract it with fine pliers dipped in vinegar or wine, as we have said, so that the extraction is straight.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In water that drips into the ear, the patient should use warm compresses of early herbs and stuff the ear with cotton. Let it lie on that ear itself or let the water fall out if it jumps. If it does not jump, take several thin and light stones according to the length of your finger and heat one slightly in the fire; put a piece of cloth or linen from the ear into the patient's mouth, and strike one stone against another on the stone in the ear, and hit with another stone on the striking stone; keep doing this with one stone against another until the water jumps out completely, and then it will jump out entirely; and if you see, take a feather and push one end into the ear, and take hold of the other end of the feather with fire until the outermost feather is burned; then repeat this with other feathers until the water jumps out completely, as we have said in the earlier section.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of small animals, like fleas and similar things, treat them as we have said in the division; but if they are large and can be felt, bring tools for extraction such as tweezers; and it is easier to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of earwigs, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in treating with distillations, it does not help; if there are no worms present, take the thread of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	Make it narrow on one side and wide on the other. Insert the most subtle end into the ear according to the degree of suffering of the patient, then grasp the whole string; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey, stop up around the string with cotton as I have said in the previous chapter; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in removing earwigs, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this device as you see here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make a container of silver or tin placed below one small hole, and above it cover with a distiller; and for pressing within the distillation have one device made of tin well-made for this purpose, and if you see take one scraper and wind around its tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish in the container, and let it be in the ear; then push down into the scraper with all the cotton and press moderately until the oil is distilled or rises from the ear; and the patient will feel the scent within, and let one spoonful of the distillation be heated with fire as if it were being distilled in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be very good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earstopping
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without having at least one hole in the ear; and this same thing happens with adults due to an ear infection or puss within the ear, and this ear infection sometimes completely fills the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a small amount of pus discharged from the ear, which can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it comes in completely and cannot be seen, it is of grave healing in various positions, and in such a case, you must place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, you should open it entirely with that spatula as shown here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And should be entirely sharp in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the opening is of flesh or cartilage of the ear, you should hold with subtle tweezers, and strike gently until the cartilage is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opening is deep in the ear, take a sharp, subtle probe and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the ear canal. If you feel the opening causing pain to the patient when they hear, pierce gently, but do not harm the nerves of the ear; then insert an ear wick according to the size of the wound, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Apply this daily until the wound is healed, take a linen cloth and soak it in rose oil and powdered vitriol; if you see the ear swelling, then pull out the first cloth and apply another linen cloth soaked in ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling disappears; then heal it until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If there is a flow of pus, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the flow of pus which are either distillation methods.
de la char des papieres	of the wood from paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is a remedy that comes on paper for the eyes when they are moist and dry; you must stretch them with tweezers and scissors, and then press them with a spatula from their roots; then put vitriol powder on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not work, you should cauterize it with the subtle cautery of the lens and then cauterize after incision; many times they heal, but nothing stays from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hailstone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times in paper, there come things that appear like hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason, the disease is called "hail", and it consists of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the treatment is as follows: keep watch to see if the hail becomes quiet from both sides, and it is a light thing to know; then make an incision on it, next, peel off each part gently, then take the forceps and crush it. If you cannot cover it without puncturing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient at all; if the tear is large, gather it together with stitches, and cure it until it heals; if it is small, do not apply force, for oil will restore it soon enough.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and grab the hail with forceps, crush and press it from both sides; if the paper is moved by the incision, do not worry; when the hail is crushed, apply salted oil and cure the wound of the one who has swelling until the patient heals.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a grease that is infused into cloth made of paper above, and it happens more in children than in adults, and it greatly affects their eyes, and they come down with catarrh at mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hurry to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces immediately, sleep above them, and their papers are damp under their eyelids that the exinach spreads and covers its appearance in oil. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient places his head in your hand; and then take one cloth made of linen, and arrange a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then put it over [the eye]; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is collected within the circle; then make a small incision in the moist area with a sharp spatula, but not larger than the wound you would make when opening a vein; and cut the skin completely until you see the exinach; and in multiple positions, the exinach comes from the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then hold the cloth tightly between your hands and turn your hand to both sides until it is spread out; and ensure that you do not damage the incision, that you do not reach the oil with the spatula, or that you do not cut it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the start of the cut, raise a little the incision lightly until it appears; then pull it out as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place them on top, and hold with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who grind seeds and place them on top to destroy the moisture that remains. Then heal it until it is healed. If an abscess becomes hot at the location, cure it with plasters cooling it down until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hair of the papyrus (meaning: plants or fibers resembling hair)
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper lice are born with hair other than nature's, and they are raised, they harm the eyes, and bring on kinds of diseases such as habitual weeping and swelling of the paper lice and albugine, all due to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure them: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicinal heat as mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterization, or by incision and stitching, or by caustic substances, as I shall explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper lice from the oil onto your left hand; if it changes color, that is good; if not, push a needle through one filament of it; and remove the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow from those hairs, taking one filament across the whole paper, and shave it; then make an incision in the part beneath the paper, under the hairs adjacent, covering the whole spatula, from the large tear to the small one; then pull one filament, and place a small tent of cloth and linen under the paper, then mark on the paper a hook-like figure, like a mirte berry, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity with which you intend to lift the paper as previously designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	If you need to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make an incision across all the lines you have marked, starting from the large tear to the small one; and it should be one of the slits near the natural hairs at the root of a radish, then insert the onion in one of the two angles of the cut, then peel it entirely; then close the two lips together with a stitch using one thread of fine linen, and squeeze out the blood, and make adhesive the excess filaments on the scissors with any sticky substance, if you choose to do so; if not, do not bother with it, then leave the stitch and the threads for 2-4 days; then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, because the paper heals at the edges of the wound and by its assembly, but the stitch is soaked (as the ancients say), and it is work done without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure similar to the fennel stalk, as we have mentioned, divided into three sections according to the following form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut that which stands above the small sections equally according to the following form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the ability to hold the pliers and the figure is not equal, take a needle with one thread, and put it into the figure; and place another thread through the large hole, and another through the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your hands; then raise your hand equally, and remove all the skin on which you have marked, as we have mentioned, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar calming ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And sometimes the hair of the paper turns: you should use what we have said about incision; but stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of canines is as follows: you should fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, and then make two canines by hand, and two thin stitches equally long as the paper and the width of the spatula; take the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads; then carefully assemble the one above the other on top of the paper covered with oil, and bind the two canines of the two parts together; leave it for some days, and the skin that is tightened will rot and die, leaving a hole through which pus can escape.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long or if you need to force it, then cure it until it heals; when the wound is closed and the paper can be removed and no longer pricks the hairs; this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The tasks are such that you take a fine needle, and tie a thin silk thread to it; then assemble the bones carefully and join them delicately, and make sure the lengths of the threads form a palm's length; then prepare another thin silk thread briefly, tie its ends together; then place the patient's head in your hand; expose the work area to sunlight so that the task is clear, for it is a subtle and delicate procedure; then push the needle into the hole where the hair is alongside, and make it pierce through the skin hastily but not through the natural skin; then pull out the hair up to the assembly, and push the pulled-out hair into the assembly, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then pull your hand until the hairs come out entirely with the natural skin.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the bones are treated and the hairs do not come out with them, you will pull out the bone with the thread that you have prepared, until the bone emerges from the wound and can be seen through the oil; then pull out both the bone and the thread, close the wound and leave it for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh heals; if the hairs are small, take a long hair from the head naturally and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated and then cut it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purulence of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or porriture comes in the oil, it occurs in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It happens suddenly through a wound, cut, or cauterization, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	The method of work is that you cut the suture, separate the lips of it, and put inside linen bandages, and let it stay until it heals; and it should not be used in its treatment with things that dry up and constrict. For if you do this, the disease worsens more than before; but work with things softening, such as fenugreek; and a poultice of warm or hot water and flaxseed oil should be prepared, and immediately apply it to one side, and treat it in this way.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret of your cure is that you must not suture it in its previous form; and this work that we have mentioned is not far from correcting this disease, so that it does not return to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and tears and cauterizations and similar things; and the process of work in it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and pierce the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear to the right one, so that the threads come out in two heads of the flesh; then put the flesh on top of the whole needle, and cut with a spatula as wide as a thumb.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts within the paper; and may the heads of the two incisions be at the four angles of the incision that you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has the name "J Grecque"; then remove that flesh, according to the thickness that its sides are pointed below it, next to the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure it with the medicines mentioned above for softening, and ointments, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the sickness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make a clean incision under the hair on the paper, as described above; then squeeze between the two leaves of a glove, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in form; and wise masters prepare all kinds of devices with every possible means to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are needed in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	under the skin of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this type of suture occurs in a man's hand in such a manner that the paper above is sewn with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must press the tip of a razor blade beneath the paper and lift it up; hold it with pliers until you extract the substance from the spatumile (a thin, delicate instrument), which should not be too sharp or too jagged, so that the patient does not suffer from the overly sharp spatumile that might hurt the oil; and make your incision, from which you remove the assembled tissue, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural form. The entire assembly is then healed, and sometimes in the oil it becomes infected, with acid and pus; then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put wool moistened abundantly with egg on top of the oil. After three days use colloids and healing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nail has two kinds: one is nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, and another that is not nerve-like but resembles white congealed moisture; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot move; and both look like they are beginning towards the great lachrymal, and grow little by little until it covers the entire eye and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take a piece of paper in your hand, then pick up the nail with tweezers of small double curvature, and place it above; then take a needle, and put one horse hair or cow hair and strong thread; bend the point of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and pierce through the entire needle, and tie the nail with thread and place it above, and scrape all the hair from the side of the nail that follows the lid and the sinew to the hair until the root of the lachrymal, then scrape the remainder in the root of the lachrymal with a subtle spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural tear duct or lachrymal intact; and sometimes the nail is placed on the eyelid only, and at the end, as we have said; then scrape off all the spatumile from which this shape is formed:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the spatula not to touch the skin tissue and break it, and that the pruning iron is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little bit of crushed egg yolk, and from collyrium made of litargyre, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerve-filled, and you cannot push a needle, and the unguis can't enter, many times this appearance of nail is treated with medicine; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take the spatula lightly sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail gently, and if you see that it does not thin out at all and the reason is pressing on it, distill from your mouth into the oil of collyrium made of litargyre and red collyrium and crushed egg yolk, and stop the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same process, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, like an abscess heals, then milk it, and first heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the wound deteriorates in oil due to great harm, then suspend it at the onion, and cut a part of it but not all, so that tears do not come; then distill red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	The first hairs of some men sometimes grow red and cover the eyelid, sticking to the paper and turning towards the outside like a rosebud on a balsam plant; and this condition is such that the patient places their head on your hand, then you open the eyes, and if all the hair is suitable for it, hold it with force; then cut the first red growth, and continue cutting until smooth to the end, taking care not to injure the eye during the procedure; and make the incision with a spatula as described in the treatment of the nail and the small forces used to remove the scrotum, according to the form demonstrated after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the hair is removed, apply oil of linseed or you break and distill red oil, or medicines corrosive, and place the oil outside, with egg white soaked cotton to ensure that it stays hot; and if anything remains, and the wound becomes cold, and you doubt it's hot, leave the oil and cure the wound with cooling agents for reducing heat; then return to your work when the wound is healed, and do this for each hair treated in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you dilute the treatment of each oil with natural oil and an accidental way with iron work, and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is strong enough to bear this procedure.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	These are the red veins that are covered over the oil and carry out their work and weaken the oil all day long. Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine if the oil, in which these veins are, is normal, and if there is no other disease but the oil; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then gently press those veins throughout their entire length according to your wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle double, as follows:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two degrees of pressure in one stroke according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then gather the veins delicately and squeeze out the blood hour after hour until you see them move away from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the spatula, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you don't cool the veins; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red oil, it will correct those who are clotted.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot collect all of it in that hour, make a poultice with soothing things on the oil to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and the abscess is certain to heal, then continue according to this method as before until it heals; and this is the form of cauterization:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil duct
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not cured, there is a defect in it that you should incise above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then repair it with all the instruments mentioned here; it is called "rough head", and it should be made like a new head, pointed like a limestone as shown in the following figure:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone on its base, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is crushed; do this once, then restore the location of medicinal extracts.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joint is welded together and pus forms, if the body of the bone is welded together and remains thus for 40 days without healing or becoming abscessed, and no bad accident occurs (knowing that it is healthy); but if not, there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to the pit of the newborn according to this form: and you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines hot, and when it is uncovered, take .1 foret according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft be attenuated up to the tip as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put it on the bone of the elbow and move your hand away from the oil by one inch, then turn the iron completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the veins if he holds his hand above his newborn; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the pus dries and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the newborn; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are widely open and do not close of their own accord, you should hold the patient down; then clean them, apply mustard or honey without piercing, then put oil (made of acacia and aloe, incense, and sarcolocola) on it, and hold the oil in place with bandages and cloths. The type of cloth to use is such that you take soft cloth, fold each one into four, and place one on top of the other according to the amount required by the eyes; then hold them together with a firm bandage, and continue applying mustard or honey without piercing; then remove the mustard or honey and leave the oil in place for a day and night; if the oil becomes soft, you should tighten it more; then remove the oil after a day and night, and if you see the eyes healing, that's good; if not, continue applying the oil and cloths and the bandage until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The open wound of the eye does not heal on its own.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the cloudy eye, it becomes like grains of resin and is visible to see; then if you see it covered, the remedy is as follows: take an awl and insert it into the root of the affected part up until where you want it to stop, then insert another awl or thread doubled at the tear duct; and make it pierce, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then tie a piece of thread around the eye socket and tighten it, then remove the awl and put oil-soaked linen on it; leave it until the filaments grow with the eye, cure the oil with soothing things until the wound heals; sometimes the wound is held in place by the eye itself with a circular piece of cloth around it until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a thin spatula coming from pure oil, clear the pus, and close it up immediately; then draw it out when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	with a thin spatula coming from pure oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This illness called "alcunnati" is not far from a bowel that has been assembled in oil, appearing like an ulcer draining pus, but it is not an ulcer; and the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit on a chair with his legs apart and feet flat on the ground. Then take the head between your two hands, move it as much as you see the bowel come towards the eyes; then insert it, and do not drain nor expose the light, let the patient see things as he is accustomed to; and if the draining of the bowel does not appear, know that it is an ulcer, and if the draining of the bowel has not been prepared as we have said. place the patient between your hands, then take a thin spatula and press it on the cornea-covered cloth .i. inch along the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal cloth and the cornea, until the bowel emerges; and when it has emerged, let it distill into hot boiling oil mixed with honey or fenugreek oil and honey, then let it be cured with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	The sharp points of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the resemblance of sharp points in the division and what is necessary for piercing; if it works according to health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light due to the sun, and hold the oil tight and very firmly; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand (if the eyes are left-handed), the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand (if the eyes are right-handed); then place the tip of the instrument next to the crown by the thickness of a reed in that hollow of the oil at the lesser angle, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and hold your hand as long as it pierces through the hollow of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place; and the measure of the way almagda should be to the full of the measure of the space which is from the prunelle to the end of the black part; this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the waxed paper, then put the instrument up to it or where the sharp point is, then press down along another path. If the sharp point now comes out, the patient can see it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little rest and if the sharp point retreats along the second path, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not move, gently turn almagda around your hand bit by bit; then replace in trepanation a small amount of gemstone oil, and let it flow inside. Then place a stopper made of oil-soaked cloth or moistened linen on the trepanation hole, and seal it with holy oil. We and those of our time put on top a mixture with much egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, since there are some men who have excessively hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then perforate only the conjunctive and do not go too deep, but make it thin; then insert almagda as previously mentioned; and to complete the work, prepare a sleeper for the patient, in which he lies on his back in two layers; and be attentive to all movements; take light foods; and move neither head nor neck, and bind him according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then rebind him for seven days; and it is not advisable that you do this during the treatment or after the incision immediately, but it is advisable to alleviate it because the pain rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess comes up, you should unbind the oil before the seventh day, and direct one who knows how to assuage abscesses; and when it is pacified, then unbind the eyes and place a small eye cup over them for any duration, and remain in that dark room. And gradually leave the house bit by bit, and convert yourself to your home; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that in his country, people do almagda piercing, which causes the water to come out, but I never saw anyone with it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they should be specifically:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these are the characteristics of the heads of this same subtlety, and the rear parts in four corners sharp.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	At no time do various strange sores born on the neck arise, of which there are some that seem like scorpions with many prongs; and if such a sore is swollen in this way or it has a sore swollen in another color, and if the sore is soft of bone color. In the case of those sores that are soft but not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, pour vinegar on these sores, and pull them out; then hold what you can with a thin sharp spatula until you know that this sore is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be held, you must cut it all off with delicate instruments gently, so that nothing remains; and if without being cauterized or bandaged, the abscess bursts, the remedy is as necessary; and if these are malicious abscesses, you should hurry and burn them with cautery until the pus is drained and all the sores are removed, then pour oil of roses or vinegar on the wound.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. If the patient does not work, moisture approaches up to the palace (palace = head), and you should know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as required, you should know that there is pus in the bone above, so the instrument does not come for cutting: then you must put a string of flax (flax = lin) about half an inch thick and white into his nose, with a space of less than one finger between each knot; and insert the patient's head through the string in its nostril to the deepest part of his mouth; and do this several times as children in school often do, and it is easy for whoever wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and be familiar with one after another while we are who are holding the string. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted the pus, then pull out the flax, squeeze the blood, and moisten the flax in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for 3 days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything remaining of the pus; and then put a reed (reed = plonc) in his nose for some days until he is healthy, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as it is called when oil and medicines are distilled in the head.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is made of silver or brass, resembling a lamp with an open neck, like a cane, and lead it in the same way; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the pus in the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times, a disease called "telul" arises in the head of the neck and grows larger and larger until it can be seen with the eye; therefore, you should cut it at the beginning, and boil it completely, then put the cautery or burning medicine on it; and if it is delayed to be cut when it is large, take care if it is hard, of a reddish color, and has poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enlarged abscess, for when it is cut once, much harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft-touched and not of reddish color, you can cover it completely; empty the patient and cut cautiously, cure the area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and sewn up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilage joints, it benefits little, except in some men. Therefore, if this happens to anyone, you should check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together in a stitch, heal it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from both sides, you must cut all the skin on their edges as much as they bleed, then join the two lips together in a stitch, tighten, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood sandalwood, and incense crushed; and put some plaster of strong or other plaster over it, and let it remain until it dries up, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitching is such that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the abdomen stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	about abscesses from lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Within the lips there often arise hard abscesses, resembling grains of wheat, both small and large; then you must turn the lips, and cut above each tooth, and take it with forceps and crush it in each part; then apply the lee of vitriol ground, until the wound is cauterized; and then anoint the wound with oil of asafetida, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the jaws
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often a swelling arises on the jaws, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold it with tongs and cut it at its root, leaving the wound open; then apply vitriol powder or other drying and constricting powders to it; if the swelling returns after incision, which often happens, cauterize it again; it will not return after cauterization; and these are the shapes of the instruments for cauterizing.
des sordens	Of the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are ulcers in the roots of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and harsh; sometimes the teeth become black and yellowish and decaying, when corruption comes to the gum, and they stink; you must have the patient sit on your lap, with his head in your hands, and remove the sores or the decayed teeth as far as possible; then clean the blackness and greenness, and the yellowish and other impurities until they are purified; if you remove that which is at the root, it is good; if not, start again on the second or third day, until everything is cleaned; know that teeth have different shapes of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work shows, because the person who cleans the teeth has other shapes than the one who cleans between the teeth; and these shapes and others are provided with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay the drawing for as long as possible, for this should not be done at all; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to shave it off.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Adonques quant li malades est contraints du tirer, il faut que tu sois certains de la dente douillante. Maintes fois desoit le dolor le malade, et croit qu'elle soit ou dente sainte, et fait tirer la bonne dent; mais toutefois ne se départit pas le dolor par ceux, tant que le mauvais reste, car nous l'avons déjà vu faire à ces saints; et quand tu es bien certains de la dente douillante, il faut que tu escorches entour la dent à tout endroit. Mespule fort pour protéger la gencive de toutes parties; puis le mouvez à tes doigts ou aux tenailles subtiles au premier coup et coup par coup, tant qu'il soit bien éclochiés, puis y afferme bien les tenailles; et soit les chefs du malade dans ton saint entre tes genoux, et le tien bien si que il ne se mouve.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After pulling the tooth out straight to break it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and push it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before. And if the tooth is pierced and chewed, it is necessary to fill it with bandages where the holes are; and hold it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled out; and it must be worked very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful that you do not break it [the dislocated joint], and leave a part remaining, and return pain to the patient by the malice of the root, causing them greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not act as ignorant lords who, through their haste and bravery, sometimes break the chariot [bone] and do not bring about what we have stated; but they often cause this great disease due to the roots that remain, or because of the chariot that they break, as we have often seen; and when the teeth are separated, wash the area with wine or vinegar and oil; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize [the wound].
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the forceps, which first silence the teeth, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you separate the tooth; these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should be large enough so that they do not bend when separating, and should be made of good iron, and serrated for holding onto the teeth.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	If the root remains exposed when pulling, you must put moistened soft cotton on it for 1 day or 2 until the gum is softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," so that the teeth seem like a beak of a plier; and inside them should be made as if a chisel and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, you must uncover the entire cheek around the root and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as plier, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be large and thick so as not to break, and if the root jumps out through them, that is good; if it does not, help with all tools, from which the shapes come later.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And help with this tool having two prongs, of which this shape comes from it:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other iron objects that are in front of the teeth roots, and with this tool resembling large pliers, from which this shape comes:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument must not be able to break, and know that many dense instruments are; and likewise other instruments, which are not counted; and wise masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the sickness require, for there are various diseases in which the ancients did not teach an instrument; and if it breaks the chariot or other bones, which it should not, then seek the instruments that are required, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and firm to hold the bone so that it does not slip away but can be held and removed; and then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, use the entire instrument for that purpose:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and are misshapen, especially in young women, you must know if the root is not near the tooth, and it is not in its proper position, and it cannot be straightened or filed. In that case, extract the tooth; and if it is erupted with the tooth, take the instrument as shown in the figure below, which resembles a small beak, and is made of sharp iron at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth, little by little in many days, due to hardness of the dentin, and because you cannot move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small steel file as shown below in form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is similar to the file used for making needles; and with the file, file the tooth little by little in many days lightly, so that it does not move until it becomes smooth; then flatten it at the end with any smoother, and if the dent is too sharp and it bites the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth fall out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth are dislocated, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew due to pain and they vomit, you treat them with constricting medicines but it is not effective; then they must be restrained with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never does; and let the thread be medium size neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you observe the teeth, take the thread and put it between two healthy teeth on both sides, as many as there are, one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering up to the part where you started, and hold your hand skillfully and carefully, so that it does not move; and let your knot be at the tooth root so that it cannot escape. Then tie the teeth with the thread using pliers, and assemble them, and place them back between the healthy tooth, and make sure it does not injure the tongue; then leave it tightened as much as it can stay, and if it dislocates or the threads break, tighten another one; if it remains and serves for a long time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the guidance of the two healthy and two misaligned teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the teeth fall out and are put back in place repeatedly as we have said, let no one intervene who is not skilled and patient; and sometimes they make the shape of a tooth of cattle bone, and place it at the location where it is missing, and tie it in place as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	1. Sometimes this ligament comes below the tongue naturally, and it is born in such a way; or due to accidental wound healing; and the treatment is as follows: you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head still, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is suddenly of a wound, you press the uncine and cut wide the ligamented part; and make sure that the incision is not too deep, because an artery is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the swollen and inflamed area with warm rose water and salt water, or cold water, then put a flax tent under the tongue; and tie the patient's tongue each night so the swelling cannot spread. And if discharge of blood comes, you put vitriol powder on it; and if the wound does not heal, you cauterize it with the slow cautery, which is good for this. Then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of a small, black or hard color that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is declining towards blenchor, and there is moisture, pour vitriol powder on it until it burns, then return to your work until you drain everything; then lift up the swollen and inflamed area with warm salt water, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	At times, boils called "godath" come inside the throat. These are properly called the two almonds. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard, small abscess of dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of blood flow; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it, or it would burst by itself; and if it is white in color, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check whether the abscess's heat has subsided and been calmed. Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open his mouth and take the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue underneath the entire instrument, which is its shape; it can be made of silver or fine brass as well as a small knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue with the entire instrument and see the abscess. Take the awl and pierce it into the almond, pulling it out farther than you can; take nothing from the cloths with you, then cover it with the instrument, which resembles a cork; even if the head is bent, one end to another, and are very sharp, made of iron or copper:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the base with pliers, here is its shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the base with pliers, here is its shape: (continued)
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside the throat, to be precise, one small abscess; and I had her throat tightly closed, so the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passageway, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within a day or two. The abscesses were swollen so much that they filled two fingers through the nostrils. So, I pierced one of them immediately, pulled it out, and removed a large piece of pus; then I closed the other nostril, opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the probe into these abscesses, cut a part of them, and did not let any pus out except a small amount; and thus the passageway in the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water first and then wine, and she continued to cut the abscess for a long time; the abscesses kept growing back, filling up the space I had vacated, until it became very large; at that point, I tricked it by inserting probes deeper into her throat and cauterized it within her throat. In this way, the abscess stopped growing, and I left those parts alone, and God did with them what He wished after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the eye swells and elongates, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is swollen large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are eased, and it is thin, you must cut it; and the one that is rounded and assembled but not long; and it is blood-colored or of dark color or black, you must make an incision in it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as I have said, according to its thickness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then insert the probe into the eye, pull it out, and cut it at .i. of 2 punctures that I have said in the incision of 2 almonds. And you must not cut more than the superfluity beyond the natural limit; for if you do so, it hurts the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we have said in the incision of 2 almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient is afraid of being cut, you must use an instrument for cauterization to reduce fear. And the method of cauterization is hot. And it is that the patient places his head on your lap, and then presses his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and touch it with hot coals, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have a lock of hair or ointment container that the medicament is put into, like a spoonful of cuillier, and place the instrument full of medicine onto the eye; and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine inside, not to the throat and the nose; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it onto the eye until you see that it is swollen and the irritation caused by the medicine has subsided; then take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and push the instrument filled with cotton into the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye; do this repeatedly until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you have to start the cauterization again, repeat it, and after the cauterization, clean the area around the eye with a mixture of cotton in butter, and wash what is around the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and treat with gargarismes until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective through fumigation rather than cauterization; if it is treated by this method, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and fennel or similar herbs, place them all together in one pot, and add water; boil the mixture; let the pot be well sealed with strong clay; and have one instrument with hairs inside the pot as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And let it be made of silver or copper, and let one of the eyes be pushed into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane while the eye is being mortified; after this process continues until the eye dries up, but ensure that you do not begin this procedure at the beginning of an abscess boil, as many things may happen; and never perform this unless in the decline of the abscess boil. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place a chicken egg crack inside the patient's head so that the mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is good treatment along with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often a fish bone or other sharp object lodges in the throat, so you must draw out what you can see and press the tongue against the instrument until you see movement in the object; if it does not open and remains lodged in the throat, make the patient vomit before the food is fully cooked in the stomach; by chance, the object may be expelled through vomiting. Or, the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or a small piece of dry bread; tie one thread to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the location, it will adhere, and then you draw it out; if it does not come out as mentioned above, take a splint-shaped instrument as follows:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And bend the instrument into a curve towards the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head high; beware not to touch the epiglottis, let the patient put the instrument in, because he must move or the matter is worsened; if he pushes it down, or draws it out completely, keep the instrument equal until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Sometimes the saliva is used as medicine, as I have said in the division, for curing medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, because you press the tongue on the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the saliva, take a small pair of scissors or delicate pliers that are suitable for this purpose. If that is not effective, then take a threaded needle, and put it in the patient's throat, and insert the tip of the needle with hot iron at its end repeatedly. And anoint the patient with cold water throughout the day. Then take a full ounce of cold water, open the mouth, pour it into the mouth without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the saliva feels the cold water, it will spill out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then subdue the patient with astringent [medicine], in the instrument that I have mentioned for the astringent treatment of the eye; do this many times, because it will require more persistence. The manner of the astringent treatment is that you take one pot or one with charcoal, and cover it with a perforated cloth, and place the head of the instrument in it; then pour your astringent, and the patient puts the chief of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that no smoke escapes, but comes only to the nostrils; and the nose will require persistence, and if it does not fall, continue the astringent treatment many times; allow the patient to suffer thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and drink nothing of water; then it will be necessary for it to come out by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument for treating the nose is such that, when it can be seen, resembles curved tweezers to enter the throat; and it should resemble a syringe nozzle, and have an abrasive tip made of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many things resembling an abscess are mentioned hereafter in this book according to what memory recalls from one and another, and they are diverse in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that the first resembles [the other], and of these, one is in its similarity and due to moisture. And the second manner is concerning joints situated on the body. For abscesses of the head are different than those from the foundation, and abscesses of the charnut joint are different from those that come at jointures, and each should have its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if it is not necessary to perforate abscesses while the boil has yet matured according to its completion; and for those that must be perforated when they have become hard, and do not die according to their maturity, such as abscesses that are near joints. For when an abscess comes near a joint, and it is left until it bursts, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint become rotten, which causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the main member, and you delay the perforation until it has matured, it will harm the main member; or if it is near the foundation, if it is perforated before it has matured; it must not be perforated without the abscess having completed its digestion, except for those that are near the foundation, which could not be penetrated and become long inside, and a fistula forms; and it cannot heal in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time for perforating an abscess that has matured according to its completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the fever subsides, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the swelling and shrinkage of the abscess's head, and other signs; and you should make the perforation where it depends less on the abscess, and where it has opened up; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places or where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those who are swollen, it should be aligned according to the affected limb. And when an abscess is in a charred area, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, the body will flow out of the opening, and it will be full of foul matter; and there may be hardening of the wound edges and its deepening. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limbs require. And you should apply small incisions, small openings; and large abscesses, large openings, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cover with care, and dress; when it has become as thin as cloth, and softened, it is necessary to do as with babies: and for those that are cut into four angles, and for those from which one cuts like the leaves of myrtle, like abscesses in the joints; and for those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar dressings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no head (i.e., if the abscess is superficial), it should be pierced completely; and when the abscess is large, and has accumulated a great amount of pus, you should pierce it, but not draw out all the pus at that time, but only a part of it; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing incorrectly; do this repeatedly, gradually, until the pus is completely drawn out. This applies to patients who are weak, women, children or old people. The body may sometimes jump with the release of the pus, which might cause the death of the patient, and you should be careful about that. Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it should be stuffed in each one with linen or old cotton; and for a large abscess, where there are many cuts, you must pack in cotton or wool of flax without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove it, and heal with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and wine, and wet a cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.  And if the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book should be used on the affected area; and if it is winter, or the wound or abscess is very nervous, then you must apply heated and wet cloths (tents and drapes) to it.  And if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, then you must apply cold and wet cloths, or cold and frozen cloths, for up to three days as we have said; and then drain the abscess, lance it, and treat it until it heals completely.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And you should know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	1. For small abscesses that come in the head, our methods are as if in cloths, just like a bladder of a grape, and there are many similarities. There are some fat ones with moisture, as well as some hard and stone-like ones without doubt that the arteries do not oppose. And concerning the procedure of the abdomen, you must try it out on every instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which this form follows, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, they cut above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, they peel off skin that contains that moisture, for it returns again when nothing is left; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; otherwise in water and oil, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and let it rest overnight. And replace the cotton the second day, as before, on the third day, until you know that it does not remain overnight; then cure the wound with ointment appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one notch of fat, cut it along this form, long; and pour your eyes into it, and peel off skin from all sides, and apply your entire care to drain the pus where it lies; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I told you before. And similarly do for a hard or stone-like abscess, and treat and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting on a hard abscess and the moist one is easier, because they contain little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head have no moisture, and from those was the abscess that I cut on an old woman's head; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone core, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had pierced it with anything, one would have made as much of a wound as a stone. In other abscesses coming from heads, especially those that come from children's heads and roots of the ears, they should always be opened for as long as possible, because pus comes out; and they should be cured as needed.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Often this abscess appears at the neck, under the ears, and in the groin, and sometimes it appears in other parts of the body, and they are large and swollen. Each scrofula is located within its coat, as the nodes of the neck and head described earlier; and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not want to obey health. In that case, when you see it in good condition for incision, resembling the color of the body, silent on all sides and not pressed against the neck artery or vein, and not deep; then you must cut over it, scrape each part, and place two incisions with the knife, if necessary, as described in abscesses of the head; and draw it out bit by bit, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and the spatula should not be too sharp or cutting, that the hand does not slip, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not let you pass over, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are appeased and the wound is softened and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, return to your work; then ask your assistant if there remain any small scrofulas, if they cut them and clean them. And if there is a large root of the scrofula in the vein, it is not necessary that you cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang down without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you scrape the entire scrofula (boil), it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, for there will be no superfluous delay due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it (the boil) and draw pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas with superfluidity, pierce where the opening is already wide; and pierce in the same way as the one mentioned earlier, by depending on it, then introduce lancets with ointment and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an enchanting ointment until it heals.
de squinance	If the scrotum becomes inflamed and swollen, apply a poultice to it made from crushed barley, wine, and oil. Repeat this process daily for three days.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the shape of the throat, but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the slit in the throat called "epiglote" be opened; and no aid should be given by these, because all the veins and the parotid gland of the sick are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in 2 mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the parotid gland, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the strangulation that comes from the swelling.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglotte, it is necessary that we make the incision below four circles or three small incisions through the transverse, between the four circles or by the amount of the incision of the siphac, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And if the joint is difficult to cut through at the incision of the epiglottis, there is no cartilage, and the veins are long in that place.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat all along, then cuts open the windpipe until he reaches the trachea; and avoids the veins of blood, if you see anything, and then severs the thyroid gland as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by cutting open the windpipe that if it jumps out through the broken place, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And let the wound remain open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed where there is doubt of strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and stitch it up entirely to touch the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing until it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the flight has fled.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then you cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, and it is thus preserved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And thus the ancients commanded to leave the wound open as long as the illness is passed, and it is passed in 3 or 4 days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it when it is healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden take one knife, and she stabbed it in her throat, and cut part of the channel of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was summoned to heal her, and found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood coming out of it, and knew that she had not breathed or spoken except through her throat, and the wind was flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I quickly sewed up the wound, and cured it until it healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And no harm came to the maiden except her voice became red, and she returned afterwards to her position.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say that in the condition of epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia" and is a large abscess of a bluish color, and it occurs mainly in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And it is according to two kinds: natural and accidental; where natural has no machine.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two kinds, of which one resembles fatness in us, and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from us through artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it should not be done forcefully except in the small one, and prove and examine it all through the opening.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you prove it like a small swelling and it cannot spread to any vein, then crush it as we crush the nose, and pull off all its skin, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And treat carefully, and heal as necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	from us (we)
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways of ours there are, which I will say all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now I must say all the difference between knot and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the boil has passed and the purulence is complete; then the fever rests and the heat subsides.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With a knot there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains one sack, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like an abscess, and grows large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are of two kinds, either fatty or moist, and many of them are of such a color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the nose, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments called "entromissoire", according to their shape and the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	The manner of inquiry about abscesses is that you take or the more moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then straighten the joint, and take care not to let it dislocate again.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture corrupts the wound, make it as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after straightening the joint there is no moisture, know that it is fat. Then make a cross-shaped incision and take pincers, and gently peel off the skin on both sides, keeping the coat intact so you can pull it out safely.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If you cannot draw it out whole, draw it out piece by piece so that there is nothing left.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if something remains, it will return many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if there is a little left and it does not bother you, fill the wound with some corrosive powder, bind the wound, apply something soothing to the abscess, and treat it with other cures until it heals.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If the wound is large, cut it with two lips and treat it with skin from a pig or other animal.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is contrary to you and you hasten and apply the vitriol powder, let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound heals, and allow the boil of blood to subside; then return to cover what remains unhealed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of intersecting instruments, and they are in four kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses with fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like needles used to sew sacks, and are made of citron cane, or iron, or silver, and the yellow ones have more value, and are more skilled at encircling the boils with fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three types: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the wound's width.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the tumors are similar to each other as you can see here: great, medium, and small; and if there are tumors with two bumps in four ways also.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are tumors with four bumps, they are also of four kinds; and if there are tumors with two bumps, there are those with only one bump and they are also of four kinds; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of such creatures is sharp, and those who do not cut it cleanly from one side only are prone to error, because one must scrape the nails there so as not to hit the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these incisions [or wounds], the bandages are applied to the wounds, so that the patient does not injure himself at the opening of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they have three types: large, small, and medium-sized, as you can see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And one should not use it [the cautery] except in the charnu [charred or burnt] places, such as limbs, arms, breasts, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Occasionally, one makes another small instrument resembling fists of bandages, shaped like this, for draining blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one applies it [the cautery] sometimes to the place that is healthy to close veins and arteries, and sometimes in this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to corrupt, until they resemble breasts of a woman;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain swollen and ugly, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to be according to this form of the line b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and apply the wound with medicine containing charcoal, then close the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the breast slopes downwards and is deformed due to its size like women, they should be divided into two halves, by two similar cuts;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	The first part of the line, "de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre," translates to: "so that one is holding the other at the end of one and the other, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g."
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then, the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and bring what we have said of stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it heal while it consumes the remaining meat and fat, then cure it until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses in the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses coming from under the buttocks are managed as hard scrofulas where they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire hole that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and anoint it afterwards until it heals completely.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula (scrofula is a chronic disease that causes swelling of the lymph nodes), then make an incision as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound opens up, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	The severing of an artery.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it becomes sutured, there are often abscesses, and the same happens at an inflamed vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if it is known in this way because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And if you feel it with your fingers, it is felt tightly; and if it is for the vein, then it is round and appears prominent.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the eyes and at the angles and near the neck and in other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, the iron cautery treatment should be avoided, and the same applies to those with swelling of the arteries on the head. Make a long incision in their skin above the skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then open the incision with scissors, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert an awl underneath [the dislocated joint], and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie a double thread around the artery for two fingers' breadth, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then insert the space between the two joints with an instrument until the swelling inside it disappears and the abscess is opened;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the remedy with a boil lance until the joint cries out;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this one with ointment following this, as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the opening of the vein, then you should paint your hand with this that you can from the abscess all over the skin;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then push the needle underneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have it one double thread so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of two parts to each of the two corners with thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not pass through, insert another needle under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four inches;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then compress the abscess until the superfluidity enters it, then compress the superfluidity of the pus and leave that which is connected;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then provide remedies of tentoriums and poultices until it is healed;
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come on nerves when wounded, or from too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the shoulder and wrist, and in all joints where there are joints, and it is a grave abscess, its color resembles that of the body, and it feels pain in many positions.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is pressed hard, the patient feels pain, but it is not fully in the body, but under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it must be held completely still from all sides, neither forward nor backward, not above nor below, and the one in the joints should not be covered by iron; for by chance it might contract.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And if it is the head or the forehead, make the skin with a spoon.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, suspend it by the onion, peel it, then open and sew up the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Hanging large lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes there occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called 'fungus' because of its resemblance to toads, and it has thin roots and large heads; and in it there are small and very large ones;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	I saw one man who had two bellies that were more like toads than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were split open, and ran with moisture constantly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I found and weighed them in one at 16 ounces, and in the other 7 pounds, and their work in incision indicates that you should look to see if the patient is moist; and the color of the arterial blood is white and moist with a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the copah is wide and the fire cautery is present with you, for in cutting there are often too large discharges of blood, and if it flows without your notice, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take a thread well made, bind the arterial blood as we have said, and leave it for 2 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then hold it (the affected body part), and do not stop squeezing the thread of plunger until it cuts off the artery, and feels resistance; and if the roots are thick, one may fear to cut through it directly due to the abdomen, but you can certainly cut through half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize it so it does not grow back; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cut the thread that is of a dark color, poor sensation, and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to treat the scrofula hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the belly is filled [with something]
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the belly comes from a cautery of a wound or a tear in the liver, and it is above the abdomen and contains some of the bulges, as happens in other cases, or blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or wind;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If it is due to the rupture of the liver and the release from the bowel, its color resembles the color of the body, it is light without pain, and has an opening with various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the rupture of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when you press it with your hands, it returns, and then it comes back, and by chance if it is sutured, it greatly enlarges at the opening of the wound and due to great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is easy, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind-inflammation, it is sensitive to touch, and the operations are that you examine whether its appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or wind-inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary to let the treatment be. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you must command the patient to strain their anus, stretch themselves out straight, and then press all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to press gently between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the joint that you have signed with all the splint.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then place half of the abscess above to all the large spoon-shaped scoop.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the nails be tied closed.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the stretched abscess on the thread, and put your thumb in it, and push the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it taken by a splinter, remove it, and push the intestines out through the opening of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take hold of it at its base, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein is obstructed, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two threads into them, and place the needles around what you have made in a cross shape that you make puncture;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then press the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can be pierced, and cut off the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you strike it when it is soft and pliable, then treat the wound as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and heal the wound.
dou chancre	the boil
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have mentioned in the division the resemblances of chancre, and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid using iron cure; and we say that chancre begins in marriage, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a chancre is in a place where it can be shaved like a chancre that is on breasts, thighs, or similar places, and must be completely removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, it should not be approached, for I have never seen anyone heal one; no one has ever healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is to purge the patient once with black bile; then let him purge if there is obvious repletion, then cut the patient into one good length for the operation; then shave your claws or chancre and all the hair from all parts, and remove everything that feels nothing from all parts; let the blood flow freely, and be careful of the wound to your hand or anything, and if the discharge of blood makes you opposed to the incision of an artery or a vein, then cauterize until the blood is coagulated; then heal with another cure until it heals.
de ydropisie	dropisy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already said in the division the likenesses of edema, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: only this [edema] should be treated with iron; one must not touch iron in these two likenesses: namely tympanites and yposarche, because it is a deadly thing. When you treat this edema likeness called "edema of the ear" with medicines, and the cure does not help, then observe if the patient is weak or if he has another disease besides edema, such as dropsy of the belly and similar things; do not touch iron, because there is doubt. But if you see the patient strong and without any other disease except edema alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must act thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Place the patient upright on your hands, and have the minister press the belly towards the lower part of the buttocks, then take the pointed spatula according to this form: And it should be sharpened on two sides. But do not make it so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it cannot bleed.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then observe if the edema is connected to the intestines: in that case, you must make an incision below the buttock 4 fingers right of the anus; and if it is due to liver disease, make the incision on the left side 4 fingers below the navel; and if it is due to the swelling, make it on the right side, and do not allow the patient to lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not run to the weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire hide with the instrument, and push it, and place your hand all around the spatula between the skin and the gristle as when peeling an apple of the appropriate size or within; then pierce the gristle until the spatula comes to the right spot, which is the tip of the bone; then pull it and place the instrument in its form: It resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of iron or light steel, and has a small hole on one side. On one side, there are three holes; on two sides, two; and one on another; and the head is shaped like a feather quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve pens:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top above is the artery, so that when the instrument comes to the bone, move the instrument now on top of it. Empty then either half or one-third because if you look at more than what is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will fall unconscious, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to its potency, and according to the conditions of the patient's vitality and his pulse; then pull the instrument and hold the artery, which is now held for the caution that stops the holes in the gristle, as I have spoken about, so you pierce it in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and take out a small amount of artery.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day, and be careful not to overdo bathing until it doesn't persist but only a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave him much water, treat with sepulchral earth or hot sand, and by sweating or bath, and expose to sun, and anoint with vinegar; and treat with medicines that dry until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	For stopping the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never are born children who do not have foreskins in the penis, or whose foreskin is small or not in its place. If it should be necessary that it be pierced immediately with a very thin spatula according to this form: then put a thin piece of cloth over the foreskin, and tie and hold it for 2 to 4 days until he wants to urinate, and then remove the cloth, and make him urinate, and then replace the cloth; and accidentally it should not be necessary because the urine that comes out does not leave the cloth closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	He who has a small perforation is to be treated with the plunger of cloth, as we have said, it will widen. He who does not yet have a perforation in its place are blocked, for no one is born who has the perforation at the tip of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and cannot ejaculate due to the material not being able to reach the marris, and it is an evil disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of work is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the tip of the penis and the base as thick as a pen's feather, so that the perforation remains in place as needed; and beware of the flow of blood which comes frequently, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the injured area, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this albate comes in the penis, and it is an appearance of hideous disease; there are both malicious and non-malicious [forms]. You must take them one by one with subtle care, crush and cleanse all of them, then put cotton wool in Egyptian ointment on top, then cure it with fine ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the albate is malicious, of a putrid color and swollen, you must apply cautery. When you have crushed it, if the albate is within the penis and has both skin and skin outside, you must first remove the albate that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the outside. For if you cure them together, there is no assurance that the parts of the penis will not be perforated, and blackness and corruption come into the penis and elsewhere; in this case, you must clean everything that is black and corrupted, then lie ointment made from pomegranate rind and honey on top, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	If there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery as follows: The cauteries should aid in two dispositions simultaneously: namely, the bleeding and corruption; if the parts of the penis are corrupted and shrunken, you must lead or induce urine from the penis and make the patient urinate; when the skin is loosened at the tip of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you must shave the area with a sharp instrument, until the ligaments are released, and release the parts of the penis from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a serious matter to speak of this, then you must lance it with a single spatula, slightly deeper than half the thickness of the rod and skin; then press gently between two fingers, and put a thin piece of damp, cold linen cloth on it, so that it does not immediately heal.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in that it does not have a constant healing process; nonetheless, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on infants, it is necessary for us to make the best and easiest work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and healers performing circumcision around one day, using forceps and a new scalpel; however, it was difficult because there were two layers, and sometimes they would cut the wrong one and leave the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound is covered, and there is double pain, and during the cleaning of the tip of the member, the point is not always certain; and during the cleaning of the nail, by accident the iron slips, spoiling the work, and many times it becomes necessary to clean it without need and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the amputation which is done to all the chains of thread I have found the goodness of experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, cut equally all the time; but that the threads be well tightened around the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not bind the thread only around the rod, but allow him to enjoy in every way that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then let the child's hand be between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the rod and blow or cut, and draw it up until the joint of the rod is even; then clean it well from the dirt that has assembled there, then tie the marked point with a double thread, then bind each finger to another thread; and hold it two fingers apart by the second binding and cut the knuckle as close as possible and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the pus flow drop by drop, for it is purifying; sprinkle powder on top and on the powder put a cloth soaked in egg yolk cooked in rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil, and leave it like that until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the strength for the healing is this: the two shoulders should be tender and sharp, and the shoulders equally as large as the hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the healing is when the marrow inside is at the incision; therefore, you must stretch it to your fingernail so that the wound becomes an abscess; and equalize it, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then take pliers and then press.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the scrotum swells, leave it until the abscesses have been calmed and the scrotum is lightly opened; cut it as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the scrotum, this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the affected area with healing powder as we have said in treating powders, and if you cut too deeply, it will go beyond its bounds, but it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, or blood congealed, or pus, or frozen urine, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not released, and you see the retention due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient bend over their knees; and they should put their feet on the back, and extend their abdomen from above the lower back, and hold the patient straight as much as possible; then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the equipment called "siringue", of which this is its form: it should be made of subtle silver, light and slender like a bird's feather; and the cannula should be one and a half palms long and delicate at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method of the discharge of urine is that you take one double thread, tie one end of it to the tip of a piece of linen or cotton, and push the tip of the thread into the syringe; and plug the surplus of the linen and push it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on one stool, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the anus; then insert the syringe forward up to the bladder, and have the patient feel it come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide leading where it goes is twisted; then the thread is pulled out little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then pull it out forcefully, and correct the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scratches or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and its shape is:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the channels lead so that the medicine can reach the penis without addition, if we can draw out moisture, and push when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see to throw your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the goat in the moisture, and draw it along with what is inside; if you draw out the moisture from the goat, and then push hard on the drawing, it will enter the goat, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient can feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	This is the form of the subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	This is the form of the subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: it is made of silver or copper, and its head is higher; beneath it are one finger or links. Then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see for cleansing the bladder. Tie it between two fingers with strong twine. Heat one piece of that moisture on fire. Place the head of the enema in the penis, then hold your hand under the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread in the holes, then assemble the circle like one would close a bag, and put within it oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone (arrowhead or projectile)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stones (arrows or projectiles), and their extraction along with medicines; and I have told the difference between an embedded stone in the body, and all its signs, and when to operate on a stone according to its size; and regarding the bladder, and the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder, resembling a jump in its subtlety; it opens the kidneys, and irritates the patient's penis, and it pains him many times, and then swells; and many foundations come from these jumps; and children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very painful in old age, and it is a medium-sized illness to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and tilt them upside down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and rises slightly towards the top; then make him sit between your hands arranged below, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards; then press and touch it with your hand.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the cavity, hasten now to cut into the stone above it. And if it does not fall by touching all around it, moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or use your thumb, if the patient is an adult; and push it onto its foundation, seek for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, pull it out by the neck of the bladder; then press down on it, and push it towards where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upward, and to remove the skin that is below the testicles in the area where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, so it takes this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And it is made between the one that is between the coccyx and the base, not in the middle but at the side of the lower back on the left side; and it should be straight above the bone, and your hands should be adjacent or at the base, and the incision should be wide enough for passage, but narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance the hands pressing on the base (the hands) may jump due to effort; and be aware that there is such a stone or angle; it is necessary to press hard so that the dislocation emerges easily. And if there is such a one who is soft, resembling a plum, round, from which the dislocation emerges lightly.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Therefore where there is an angle and edge, make the incision larger; and if it does not dislocate, you must pull up on the pliers that are shaped like a chisel at the tip to force the stone to move so that it does not escape; or you put under it the small curved instrument called the clavis; and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, widen one hole with a drill and then remove the bone without cutting it.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one arrow, push the largest one first into the bladder, then strike it, draw it out, and pull out the smaller ones afterwards. If it is very large, it must be cut open to make a larger wound. For the patient, two things happen: either he dies, or urine comes out immediately because the wounds cannot close; but still try to extract or break apart with pliers as much as possible while you pull it apart in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	When you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, tightening it, and place one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine or in oil and cold rose water on top, to cool down the abscess; then raise the patient's head and do not loosen the rope until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the rope, wash the wound well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diaphinecon and basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses boils come in the wound and corrosions, and if blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained because of this, which is known in such a way that without jumping with urine: therefore, press your hand in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will rot and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Lift the wound from pus and inflammation and cleanliness, and assist in every way that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you bind them with two bandages, and gather the medicines on top of the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and it is guided by the penis and pierced through, and urine cannot come out; you should treat it as I have said earlier, that you cut many times, and there is an excuse for cutting because of this cure. I have already proved it in such a way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod of this shape and sharpened at four angles on one tip:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then insert the iron rod through the urinary channel under the stone so that it cannot return into the bladder; then gently push the rod into the stone; and turn the rod in the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on the part of the stone that is inside the canal. Soon it will be broken, and it will jump out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then insert one cord under the stone and another above, then make the canal towards the stone between the two ligaments, then pull it out, and cut the ligament, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's stone (or pelvis)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rarely that a stone (or pelvis) becomes pregnant in women, and if it ever happens, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that it cannot be found a woman well-informed who exposes herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply placed than the stone of the man, therefore it requires a deeper incision, and great fear it causes.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need this, it is necessary that you take a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate in any case to take a gentlewoman experienced in the art of women; and present to her a wise woman alive or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the incision of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and carefully check if the woman is a virgin; then you must insert your finger or base and seek the stone; and if you find it, hold it under your finger, and recommend that she push with her hand or on the patient, and squeeze and press her left hand onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If you find it, she must move it little by little from the bladder opening towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the root; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh in the area where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and cut it off at the first small piece.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then insert the hand into the lower abdomen, if you feel the stone, press the wound so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, sharp or smooth, long or round, and with grooves. Know their appearances to determine the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the bone protrudes, set it in place with powdered vitriol and hold for an hour until the bone is cauterized; then return to your work, until the pain subsides, and have tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone for assistance in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the bone protrudes, and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and hold with tourniquets and bandages, and do not continue to press it, and leave the stone alone and do not draw it, for there is a chance that the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has been relieved and the wounds have healed, then return to your work until the pain subsides.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A watery hernia is nothing but a collection of moisture or white matter, which is under the skin near the testicles, containing an egg; and it is called "white matter", and sometimes it properly belongs within the lining of the eggshell, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the leather of the scrotum between the white matter we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this watery hernia is weakness that comes to the testicles, and the matter spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes there comes a blow to the temples, and this moisture can have many colors: either it turns pale yellow, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white like we have said, it is an abscess, that is, long like an egg, and does not open the temples, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	and if there is moisture in the very cloth (tissue), it is an abscess with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the hide of the kidneys and the white meat, one feels it well; therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly with a probe, so that its shape becomes clear as mentioned before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that follows.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be purged to our ability and the fullness of his body; then lie him down on his back, on something slightly elevated, and place many blankets under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then it is on its left side, instruct the minister to be on its right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the shoulder;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, strike the cartilage of the shoulder along its length until it is separated from the tip, and let your incision be straight in cutting the cartilage as far as the white part, and remove the cartilage carefully according to your power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the cartilage straight through with one large hole and drain all the water. Then place your fingers, and lift the cartilage upwards. Do not touch the shoulder, but only the cartilage. Strike the rib of it carefully, if you do not strike it skillfully, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg (or yolk) jumps out of your work, reset it to its place when you have completed the operation with the syringe; then sew together the two sides of the joint with a suture, then heal it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if the egg (or yolk) is corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you bind the vessels which are suspended, taking care of the outflow of blood; then cut the joint to its entire length, extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts together, know that they are branches; then cut the other part equally as you did the first, draw out the blood, and put dampened flax soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put other damp wool soaked in wine and oil on it, and put two pieces [of cloth] on top, and cover with double layers of fabric, and tie all around with the string as shown in this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of fabric, make them into bands of damp woolen cloth according to this shape and assemble them on the thigh area, with one piece covering from the base to the back, and the other at the shaft area; and the two ends should be gathered in the belt loop of the braces.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this ramie is used as a fire cautery, the size of an iron blade, and you should take one thin cauterizing knife, cut through the skin at the joints, and heat it as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the fluid is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If one takes the fire cautery in this manner, and pierces it through to the bone, and burns it with this subtle cauterizing iron:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And hold it in all ways that you can, as long as it is heated up completely; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg (yolk); and know that this work is more effective; and be careful of bleeding, and make sure the incisions are made in order.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything happens against it (the cautery), or an abscess bursts or bleeding occurs or something else, then treat what has happened against it as was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work due to its horribleness, you bring about perforation as I tell you; and it is when you are completely sure by the signs we have mentioned that you pierce the place where the water [collected] is located.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part, as wide as the spatula, and make the perforation long along the body; and let the wounds be wide, so that all the pus flows out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the rest of the pus flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the white cloth does not allow the fluid to flow from the wound's mouth, you must insert a reed or instrument used to treat fluid from abscesses, as described earlier; then enlarge one finger width the wound, ensure that the fluid returns, and it will heal within 5 to 7 months. Once healed, the patient will recover his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess in the thighs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Ensure that in the section of this rule, there is fear in various situations, so it seems that one should leave it [the abscess];
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and resemblance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Then many abscesses come from bodies, and especially from the kidneys; and this is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is known to be due to an excess of sour and acid fluid, which spreads to the kidneys, or by impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	The color of an abscess corresponds to the color of the body; it does not feel pain, but is a severe abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance, there is an abscess hard and rough, of such color, and sometimes comes from an artery, or the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, it can be known by the location of the abscess hot, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you should not touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	A person afflicted with swelling of the vein is known by his disposition to the manifestation of the touch of fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can easily perform the incision on this resemblance, and on other sores.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you cut the core of the boil, then the egg is raised high, and the white streak flows out from the bottom of the boil, and deliver the suspensorium of all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already soft with these newborn sores, then it is necessary to draw out the egg, and cut.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it [the dislocation] is in the breast or within the chest, you must deliver all that cavity and crush it firmly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the navel is located behind the back, you must crush everything and extract the afterbirth as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with damp linen in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of an abscess in the cheeks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	this is an abscess covered by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of cheeks,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and when the patient goes, they go quietly.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is equally dangerous as described earlier.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and nevertheless we shall tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the suspension device for the eyes below his feet.   (The suspension device is probably for keeping the eyes open during treatment.)
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	stretch out all the vessels that are close to the vein and bind them with the master's thread,   (The "master's thread" is probably the surgeon's or doctor's string used to tie off blood vessels during surgery.)
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then apply a sharp spatula wide through the hole where the vessels are exposed, until they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temple;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert an awl with one double thread and tie it to the first place where the blood has come out, and tie it again at the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then press the knee straight, in accordance with the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then dress the wound as one would an arrow-shot, so that no pus leaks from either side.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because in this way there is no ill coming, and if all the pus comes out from one side, you must draw out both sides.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of pus, and dry up and cannot heal themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the nose
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	the consequences of this incision are caused by the opening or breaking of the nose, or the extension on the belly in the area of the inguinal region, due to which the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the openings.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this rupture is either due to breaking or extension, and these two methods of causing pain come from different sources: either from impact, jump, fall, or lifting a heavy object with a wrong posture, and similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs that this is due to extension of the nose are that it happens gradually, over a long time, and not suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are equal towards the full, because the pus follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the surgical incision, which makes sudden pain appear at the beginning, and the abscesses are various appearing under the skin close to it, and this is due to the release of the intestines and the body's reaction to the surgery.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	Sometimes the intestines come out of the circle and are retained, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, therefore it is advisable to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestines with their hand inside in the wound, if they can reach it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then place him on his neck, between your hands, and lift his legs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then extend the belly upward, and strike the whole hide of the flanks with long strokes.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then push the blunt irons of the belt buckle, according to what you need for opening the wound, and they should be such that the eyes can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scourge the sores that are underneath the skin of the genitals, as long as the white sores are hard and exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then push your index finger into the genitals, between the first white sore that is underneath the skin of the egg and the second white sore.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and remove what is behind the egg, and between the second white sore; and then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and bring the first white sore up to your left hand, and lift the egg towards the abdomen with all the white sore.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister to stretch the arm upwards, and undo the one that is in front behind the elbow.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if there is any intestine wrapped around the bone or hard white matter found, and if you discover anything of this kind, push it into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the kidneys; after the loin, then cut the joints that appear from the threads, until there are four threads left.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then gather the joints together in a cross-like manner and tie the syfac (the displaced tissue or organ) that we have mentioned is below the skin of the kidneys, with a strong thread of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the shoulders in cloth, and tie them with strips of fabric so that no vassals who nurse it can enter, unless an abscess cloth comes.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and make the knot according to the first knot long with two folds of that one, and after these two knots leave a space of about one finger's width under the keyhole for air to pass through.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and afterwards in the round shape that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the eye, as much as to corne it but not to break it, as we said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on wounds, and bring the ligament as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white parts as we have said are cauterized after incision, due to fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens often, and leave the ligament until it falls off by itself; if it does not fall off, heat with hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls off.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then cure the wound with another remedy, until it is healed perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like a ramik who is assembled with the bladder, in this way that you tie the vessels after the incision lightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then press it in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who open it, until the vessels stop flowing; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes there comes rot in the groin, as we have said, and it opens the joints; and no internal organs are sent to the anus, and if any are sent, it is little, and it should be repaired every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	Furthermore, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or phlegm grows, as long as internal organs are sent out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	This occurs by the extension of phlegm in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflamed the joints and opened;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then strike the area of the swelling inflamed with a flatiron of three fingers width;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and pull out the pus that is under the skin which is swollen, then take the iron and place it on the apparent surface of the pus;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press the flatiron to the full depth of the abdomen, then cut the two apparent surfaces of the pus on top of the iron, and cut both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then straighten the head (neck) and do not cover it with a cloth or extend the eye nor anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the ramie for the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you bandage the threads, if it becomes infected and treats the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The cloth is compressed, without appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are more effective in this place and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin on the buttocks
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin on the buttocks softens in some men, because the charms inside are softened and visible; and when one sees it is necessary to make the patient lie down on his back, and to strike the softened skin with the natural skin; then bring together two lips at a stitch, and if you see, sew the excess of the softened skin at 3 or 4 stitches firmly; then strike between the stitches, and the cure as with other wounds, until it heals, and close the hole with thread.
dou chastrement	the punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	1. Know that castrations are discussed in our law, and I do not wish to speak about it in this book; and it is not necessary but for two reasons: the first is that men in castration should respond when asked, and know the cure; and the second, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, swine, and other animals. I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the genitals become softened; then grasp them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are of two types: one type is like the figure of a woman between the two genitals, having hair and sometimes urinating in court; and another type is in women who have something above the penis as a rod and two genitals. And the treatment for both men and women is to cut the scrotum together and treat them like other wounds; however, there is no cure for men whose urine squirts through the skin of the genitals.
de la tentigene	Of the tenor (modern English)
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	The swelling (tumor) is a growth attached to the natural part, as long as it is ugly to see; and some women have such large ones as big as a hand, and that is the case. You must dye the superfluous part of the tumor with your hand or onions, and lightly cut it off; and do not go too deep, so bleeding does not occur, then treat it with another cure until it is healed; and at another char (growth) that grows in the mouth of a woman, and it bursts out, and perhaps jumps away, and has the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they are called the "cow disease" by the ancients. If you must cut it off as we have said for the tumor, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	The erratic growth is a hardened or stone-like tumor on the surface of the body; and it is called "erratic" because it cannot be removed by simple cutting. When this kind of swelling arises in the body, it should be cut open with a knife until it is completely severed from its base; then take a hot iron or an emetic and cauterize (sear) the wound, so that the bad humors do not remain there and cause more pain.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	1. The erratic is when the nature of a woman is not perceived or is small; it can be natural at birth or accidental due to disease; it can be caused by the child being malpositioned, or from a subtle or large cephalic presentation, and it occurs fully in the womb, on the side, or underneath, or wherever it may be. They should be conceived and delivered, and the flowers should grow; this is recognized by observing the swelling of the belly. If the swelling appears near the hands or the navel, then hasten, and proceed as follows: place your two hands together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread out; then form the two hands, until the subtle cephalic presentation becomes round, and press the swelling; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the spot, and let the woman rest every day so that it does not heal. And if the cephalic presentation is hard and large, you must cut it with a spatula resembling the leaf of myrtle. If the swelling is of the afterbirth, suspend it at the navel and cut; have ready medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg; then bring a large bandage, so that the wound does not heal; and in this way, it should be kept open, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure other wounds until it is healed. And when in the womb, char nee appears, it must be covered as described above, unless it is an abscess enlarged. For the abscess enlarged that is in the womb, one should not try to touch or treat.
des emorroides	1. Hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Emorroydes are openings of veins that usually do not require treatment, and when emorroydes become old, they become threaded; and as we have said in the division, the resemblances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that respond to cure. I say that emorroides and threaded ones, when they are fully grown in the womb, and they cannot be felt, can only be cured with iron. Those that are at the mouth of the womb, can be felt, are those that can be cured. Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then remove the threaded one with tongs by its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine over it to stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the opening for an hour, then immerse it in cold water; and if bleeding persists, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark and grape seeds and wild gale and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one plaster on her back. If it bleeds, that is good. If not, make fumigating bags for the back and breasts without cutting; then take linen, wet it in plantain or marigold juice with old wine, and apply it to the place. And when the abscess settles, cure the place with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a small hard lump, so it must be covered as I have said for threaded ones; and then cure it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses in the womb
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many forms of abscess come in the womb, such as boils, inflamed abscesses, herpes, fistulas, emorroides, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the womb, which is not one of those that are covered with skin; and if you want to know about ironwork, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and turns red if it can be seen. Do not hasten to pierce it immediately, but let it heal until the pain subsides; then have the patient lie on one seat, and provide two small seats for him to lean against, supporting his back and spreading his legs apart; and his thighs should be spread out, and place his arms under his thighs, and tie them well with a strong rope; then bring the cow's udder towards the right side of the abdomen, and provide the tool used to open the womb, from which comes the shape; and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you pierce the uterus first to know its depth, so that what enters inside of the instrument does not go too deep, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the uterus with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it must be placed on top, and marked. And when the abscess opens, and it becomes soft in the hand, it must be covered with a bandage, at the head, a linen cloth; and when the boil is empty, you must place clean lint soaked in rose oil or dry green oil in the wound; and place the lint on top of the abscess and on top of the handle with clean linen dipped in water or cooked herbs such as calendula and aristolochia. Then leave it for two days to heal with ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes the womb and the wound are lifted by enemas of water and honey, and then water or long-rooted plants such as calendula and aristolochia that have been cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound returns in the womb, you must guard against ironwork, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth and the signs when she sees the woman dilate downwards and desires to smell the anus: then hasten the infant to come out; thus, you understand that this childbirth occurs according to its natural form, and it is born through its head, and the afterbirth follows with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's abdomen so that the infant comes quickly, for when it descends towards the head, it accompanies him, and the husband rids himself of his waste by good purification. And this does not come in any other way. Sometimes it comes through its feet, or the body or chest, or hands, or abdomen, or side, and is turned accidentally on its neck, and by other evil figures; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures in which one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out through its head naturally and the woman gives birth painfully with weakened vitality, she should be seated on a saddle or held by women, and anoint her private parts with oil or fenugreek cooked in oil; then the midwife shall insert the small spatula-like instrument shown here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	1. And cut the afterbirth (secondine), and strike its heel so that the afterbirth which is inside comes out; and seize the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must foment the woman with musk-root of fenugreek oil; afterwards, make her take and vomit medicine (condisi), and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then bring forth the child.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	The delivery of the child over its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	If the child comes out over its feet, you must push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn the shoulder blade gently, little by little, until it is even.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one piece and stretch the shoulder blade gently, little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps up to the hips when commanded to grab, then make it vomit with a constriction.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps forward, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it [the dislocation] is not as we have said, turn it gently until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Here comes the translation: Gently turn it.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, take musk of high quality and oil of sesame, and melted resin, and grind all in one mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put this ointment on the woman's nature inside and around it.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Make him sit upright in acute agony until below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it becomes soft beneath (it), make one collyrium of myrrh, place it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Make him sit on a seat, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose, and press gently on the abdomen because the child is now leaping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child on its thighs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, place its hands gently in palms.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then lay it on its neck, let its feet hang downward, and it lies on one bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	fold its hands together, then take hold of its hands above the belly and uncover the buttocks until it is exposed below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	If the infant does not jump, take its feet and bend it forcefully, then bend it upward towards the stomach, then put your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	Then make the woman hold the child with her hands until it comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The newborn child coming out, one hand holds it from above.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	You must devise a way to return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be returned [to its place], then lift up the woman and go away.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then lay her on a bed with her legs apart.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then administer the medicine I have mentioned.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	Hold the child according to its natural shape, make it vomit, and command her to grasp it until the infant exits.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	For the delivery of the child on its neck, have her spread her hands and turn her face towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	The bailiff must seize his hand, then gently pull it and deliver the child.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when they are even, place the natural muscle relaxant of high altitude and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct them to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to take hold of it; and make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, administer treatment to all those affected in turn.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to treating them in this manner, grasp the affected area with your nail, until all moisture has been removed.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child presses on its face and neck, it causes the bone to break, which is not held, and the child dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Push the child inside (into the womb), as much as you have it in the correct position, and command the woman to take herself once.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then if she gives birth easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins' birth
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not strange, and it happens frequently.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twins are sometimes born but they do not live, if I may name them.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know they are multiplying, and are destroyed by the scythe which divides them, which is linked to filth.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes it happens as naturally as an animal giving birth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it comes out forcefully, then the treatment shall be as we have said, and let the physician be skilled, and do quickly and lightly whatever it requires.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And do it in such a way that it is beneficial for healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children  --> multiple children (in this context)
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the holy wisdom.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is necessary that the midwife knows this, because sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if it happens in this way, do as necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman in labor with a dead child or abdominal pain, as I said in the division, and it does not come out forcefully, and you are forced to work by hand.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if you know that the woman is in good health and has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	The woman must lie on her back, with her hips inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	The midwife should shave the woman's private parts, or tie her to the bed so she is not treated in delivering the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oil mixed with myrrh and fennel seeds and flax seed oil, then anoint her hands with these oils and musks.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then insert them gently into the woman, then ask for one log of wood that will fit in the appropriate place,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take care if the infant is prepared for surgery on its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	push needles into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the dislocation is on the limbs, push or hammer them back into position at their midpoints;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that you grip the onyx with your right hand, and place the corbeure between its two ends with your left hand, and push it gently with all your hand, and pierce the onyx into one of the places that we have mentioned, until it comes to an empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the onyx:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then pierce it against another onyx, or use three if needed, so that the extraction is equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then equalize it by moving from one side to the other to make it move, and hold the fingers together to keep them in place, as shown in the figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	If part remains, apply oil to some of his fingers and push them into that part, and pull the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If none remains, place this finger or higher and do so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to strain.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	Then you must fold over a cloth, until it's all covered.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then wrap the wound at the joint or at the heel, and in this way you must do for the other hand and feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's hips are large and narrow at birth or if it has a swollen head assembled.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If you must insert a splinter-like spine between your teeth, and press down on it and draw out the pus.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	you grind it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in the same way, make it swell naturally if the anus becomes inflamed.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	then remove the bones with forceps.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the head of it (shoulder) jumps out and is held with force, it should be split open, as far as the moisture that is further out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	If it cannot come out, strike it into pieces at the spot where you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture subsides.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on top of the feet, the attraction is slight, and the reduction to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is strangulated in the belly or the groin, you must draw it out with a cloth wrap around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and when the belly or the groin is swollen due to moisture, you should reduce the swelling;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if another member is set (broken), and the joint remains;
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	push the ball of your hand into the orifice of the anus, and draw it out until it reaches the mouth of the anus;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then insert a small or two, and draw it through [the affected area].
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the anus is narrowed due to abscess heat that has come, it is not necessary to work on it.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	instead, administer moist and fat substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and let them rest in warm soothing and moistening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on his side, and you can make him straight, then administer what we have said in the live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one cannot make him straight, then pull him apart piece by piece and leave nothing of the spine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	Then when you have done this, administer what we have said in the plasters that come for marriage.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, let it be stopped with strong compression, and administer other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had killed an infant, then consulted another about it and revived the other infants.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came to his armpit and swelled so much that it opened and started to burst.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, but I thought for a long time and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on strong plasters with great adhesion, and an bone came out, and after several days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel much, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	It seemed to be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sought the wound and found many bones until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman lived for a long time in this condition, and eventually regained a little strength.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have not remembered this chapter except for the reason that when masters find an unusual thing, they know what to do about it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the dislocated shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here follows the form of the pressor, with which one weighs books; and in two turnings are the heads of the two levers.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	The horns (or probes) should be more delicate than the restriction, and made of ivory or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the rod (or probe) should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the tree (or handle) one finger, and its length half a palm;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and within two fingers should be two equal lengths of this same rod, which are joined together at both ends, half a palm in length or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two lengths are inserted into the mouth of the mallet to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, is to be made of ebony or boxwood, in the likeness of pincers.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and have two arms, two pincers, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see opening the woman with all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, feet hanging down and legs apart.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then put the two shoulder pieces together in the socket, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between his thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand over the entire instrument, just as you did with the tweezers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the socket, until the ball indicates what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely sheathed and has multiple similar parts; and when the mirror reflects them, he works more quickly and higher for humans due to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not hastily prepare the instrument without first arranging it, as its necessity is not easily excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her urine, and then make her vomit with disgusting substances, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	If she jumps because of it, that is well.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If it is not so, take a pot and make a syringe or cup, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, caraway, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cane or lid on the pot, and place the other end in the mouth of the patient.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and hold it until the vapors enter the patient's mouth; then make him vomit as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal as instructed, command the maidservant to wet her left hand in sesame oil or musk-scented water, then place it on it.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and let her search for it again; and when she has found it, grasp it gently and stretch it out little by little straight, so that the man does not feel pain during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but you must move it gently from side to side and then pull; it will come out and dislocate again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the maw is opened wide, we have said the cure for emptying, and the fumigation of herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not all that we have said, then ensure you do not draw it out.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the maw, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then you cleanse it with ointment trifarmaçon.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it will persist and return, and become feverish; but nevertheless, when it comes and causes bad smell in the stomach and head, it will hurt the sick person.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this purpose: no one of the ancients has proven fumigation with dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used for fumigating a woman to retain flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is shaped like glass resembling a cane, and the narrow part is inserted into the body, and the wide parts are placed over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the tinea until it is destroyed, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	To drill the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation drilled, but it has been stopped up with a subtle syrup:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, instruct the maidservant to pierce him with a lance at his due place, and not pierce him with a sharp spur, and guard the opening so that it is not touched.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Next put wool soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with an ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not recur, put or place a plum stone there, and leave it for many days, and it should be removed when the patient is seen to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this plugging of wounds or abscesses occurs; it is necessary to cover the wound in this way: if it heals, as we have said with a plum stone.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from the base are nodules, and larger than those that come out of the side of the foundation, or in the space between two parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodulation is old, it becomes inflamed, and moisture wakes up pus or thin boils,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And sometimes they are Persian fistula; and they are recognized by this, that there is either evacuation or windiness when the patient evacuates, and possibly it may jump out one side.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach the junction of the thigh, and up to the nut of the calf.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the Persian fistula by its foundation, and not the non-Persian fistula:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And you shall bite your tooth index or foundation, and insert a fine awl of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	If there is a twist, insert a thin splint or horse hair until you feel the splint or the hair at your tooth.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	If you do not understand it and no blood, pus, wind, or urine comes out as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Know that it does not pierce at all; hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates up to the bladder or leads to the conduit of urine, if it shoots out urine and cannot be sealed with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the junction of the calf, then the tendon comes out to its place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if it is not twisted and there is no injury around the pain, then it remains thus, and no medicine or binding with ointment is of use.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these Persian bladders, there is no remedy but work, and the foolish doctors' vain attempts who involve themselves with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not Persian nor old, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the sick person lies between your hands on his back; and have the legs lifted up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then push a tent of iron, or wood if there is a curvature, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must place your finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	If it is felt that the dislocation has penetrated through; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger or flesh, then you know that it is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	However, one can heal some, but it happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the help that one gives, it is heating the cautery subtle according to the width of the wound, as it has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And push everything hot into the fistula until it comes out from the base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as you know that these charred pieces should be burned, which resemble a bird's quill.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Then cure the burn with damp cloths soaked in butter until the char is gone, then cure it with a healing ointment made of burning char and resin.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it heals in this way, that is good. But if it cannot heal otherwise;   And to make sure that the wound does not become infected, apply some medicinal herbs and keep it covered with a dressing:   Et pour ce que le maulx ne soient a la grant plaie, mette de bonnes herbes medicinales et couvres le d’un emplastre.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it tries to enter [the wound], and does not pierce as far as the base which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent you place a thick covering of flesh or of syfac, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering is cut;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the tip of the fistula approaches and presses against the tent, and then the cautery is applied after that, until it reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And the tent is released and it will tear; then take out those fatty tissues that seem like a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the bone breaks through [the skin], and pierces you, either burn it with fire or apply a medicinal cure.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	The fire cautery consists of two things: namely, the burning of these adjacent charred areas, and the stopping of blood flow and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then apply the treatment for wet tents in butter or cooked cheese until the wound fills with pus and the charred areas are covered in it.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with onions soaked in hard charcoal and dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is reset, it heals and does not dislocate again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes up to the surface of the foundation and is separated from the body, push your thumb or the foundation into it and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel a tumor, and there are two layers or the membrane or charms, where it is almost ready to pierce, but has no other way of healing or hope except by one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you burn it as we have said, or you strike it to the bottom, or if possible you put pressure on it and treat it as first aid;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep, so you do not cover the holding element that supports the base, and let the evacuations come through voluntary sensation;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then heal it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut off at the base, either by force or by another tool specified.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then fill in the cavity in the wound as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the area beyond the base: it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes there are fistulas of this kind: and it is when you press the edge of the fistula against the base of the skin above,   \]
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If one takes a tent peg pierced through the head according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And put .i. thread twisted in .ij., and push the tent peg through the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then pull out that thread, so that you push your finger or base to:
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And draw out the head with thread, and join the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And do not tighten it at any time until the threads seize those things that are between them and they stick together;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open by itself, make it open in all possible ways as you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not advisable to cover a wound with a plaster while it is healing, as previously mentioned, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the pointed spinal splint used to make a fistula is very sharp at both ends and cuts.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, it is not covered because one should not cover what one should not cover, as you see here:  (This suggests that covering a wound with a plaster should only be done when necessary)
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids   (medical condition characterized by the swelling of veins in the rectum and anus)
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Emorydes (emolients) are of two kinds: they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and away from the base of the foundation; but those that are away have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and they have a yellowish tinge or a small amount of blood and are the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure for those that have them within the foundation is to instruct the patient to cough, so that the foundation loosens and the phlegm appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, you hold it with tongs or take hold of it with your nail, then strike at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold it with their moisture, you take hold of it with cloth or gauze, or a piece of linen;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and you pull them towards your fingers, then strike, and sprinkle some hot powders on top as a substitute for the cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as said in the chapter of cautery, then you cure them with other treatments until they are healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, you clisterize the patient with biting and harsh clisteria to clean where the foundation is, so that it can come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the patients prepare themselves and the threads are far from the foundation, then the cure is easy;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you grab them with your nail or tweezers, strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healthy and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you make the stitch in this way: take one twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is wide; draw the thread tightly, then knot the thread, remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, leaving one hole for drainage of excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a soft cloth moistened in rose oil or turpentine on the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then leave it until it stops dripping, and when it is dry, treat it with ointment and other treatments until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	With the drying of fevers or foundations   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "dou sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.)
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is a drying of fevers in the intestines and due to natural constraint; and when the disease is old and medication has no effect.   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.)
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you remove the bark of a splint or your fingernail from above, so that it does not become wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then cure it until it becomes dry as required.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot dry, then shave more strongly than before, as much as possible, and remove the bark.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let it heal completely.
dou fremit	The trembling / shuddering
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formica is a small hollow place found between the body, and it travels deep inside;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes the shivering freezes the body, and it feels like death due to trembling, spreading throughout the entire body, more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a cane made from an ostrich feather or a strong goose quill and place it on the joint, until the purple circles encompass the joint all around;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand along the entire cane until you cover all around the joint and push it in, and harden the joint from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a cane made of iron or wood in the following shape, and be thin underneath and wide above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not perforate, because one must hold the breath and press; if you wish to cauterize, then cauterize the trembling, as is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the clyster (enema)...
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they make an enema of silver or arsenic, or melted beeswax or honey mixture; and sometimes they prepare small or large instruments according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, it is applied in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cluster is either small or large, where the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an opening where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head should be pierced within; and on one side there are two holes, and in the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And let the stomach or man put the medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And between each hole, there should be space, then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted cord in 10 or more layers, and bind the stomach like a goat's pouch.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicines are inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then cleanse (it); and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicines not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the instrument with oil or egg yolk, or similar things, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the ministers press the patient's two hands together while he is completely visible, then take out the plaster and wash the patient's legs to the public area.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medication seems to be working, squeeze as much as possible; and if it swells up all night long, it will be a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plaster the patient with a belly disease of discharge, and the medication begins to heal quickly, continue to treat it until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are ulcerated or abscessed, whether they be the suppository as well, it should be of such subtlety as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the suppository with which the skin should be tightened:
des plaies	wounds  (plural of "plaie")
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you the treatments for hands and medicines, according to completion.  (The first two sentences are a summary of the previous section.)
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what kind they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Wounds are made by the thrusting of a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or arrow or fist blow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	According to the parts of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or chest, or stomach, or liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will start with simple wounds of the head, for it will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes or abscess and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to arrow impact or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the healing of an abscess: if it makes pus from the head itself even though there is little blood from the wound, and the pus is on the contrary in the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and help the sick man to empty his body of wine and thick foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it doesn't want to heal, its flesh should be reduced, and it should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And put on the wound if an abscess has come, cotton soaked in rose oil or stiptic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, here I will say a little powder later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wounds have been moved by the wind, put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, as I will say about wounds in the abdomen, by suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is open to the bone, gaping and not holding together, bind it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore tough skin in place of hide.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And command the patient to eat coarse foods, such as boiled heads and cooked grain, like peas, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or leather putrefaction not on the bone, cover it completely and throw boiling water on it, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if an artery is in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without surgery, cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if the wounds are small and simple, the healing is easy: it is that you put this powder that hardens as soon as the flesh has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of the powder is: take a part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; four parts of live coal, and grind the powder finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	apply the wound, squeeze it open, forming a hole, until it exhales well and unites with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, leaving it to heal by itself if it does not swell; for the medicine is not withdrawn until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at times this is done only with coal when neither incense nor dragon's blood is available, but the wound has not yet healed.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the sore has moved the wound, indeed it has, do not put this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments, or powder made of barley flour with water and honey, until it stops flowing.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle tweezers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you afterwards about the breaks of the head (or skull).
de la plaie dou col	About the wound of the neck (or throat)   (I am assuming that 'col' here means 'neck', but it could also mean 'throat'. The original French term is ambiguous in this context.)
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes or affects the neck and it is simple without any difference from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are cut.   (The original French term 'col' is ambiguous in this context, meaning either neck or throat.)
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than letting them heal on their own and not applying any restraints, for it harms the nerves and causes them to shrink.  (Assuming that 'col' means neck.)
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And place nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water washed in sweet oil, and boiled in sweet oil as well.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other similar stones in the same way, and always moisten them.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then heal it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce or incise them lower.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, tie it off, cleanse it, and cauterize if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the spine of the throat is cut or the vein is preserved, so that the meat goes:   ...(rest of line missing)
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If the heart is located above the throat, and it does not touch the throat but is placed according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then allow it to progress and leave it for some days, then heal it with strong ointments until it heals.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	If the wound presses into the bone, open it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are broken bones, break them all if you can, and those that you cannot, leave until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let the dislocation be reduced and aligned.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, cure as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from spear or knife.   --> Of the spear or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if bubbles rise from the wound; then know that the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep and fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it immediately nor bind it for the blood that dissolves will not stay in place.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	return to the patient's heart, and open him up.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But apply an attracting ointment, and let it rest for two hours each time.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you don't have an ointment, place a piece of dry cotton on the wound to draw out the moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	Make the patient sleep on the wound for two or three days, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If no spasm or bad tremor of the heart comes, nor any twitching of the entrails;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the proper alignments, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Perform the cauteries and other treatments, until it is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot be healed, and it opens again, know that there is a fistula; cure it as necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple (single), or deeper, or on the back, then treat what is in front of it.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, sew (it); if it is small, powder (it), and if it is embedded in the bone, and has split into fragments, whether it is an open wound or not, pull out the pieces if they are dislodged.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not dislodged, let the wound heal by itself, align the extractions (or treatments).
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, use similar judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The dislocation of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocation of the abdomen is large, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a large wound, the intestines sometimes protrude, or the intestinal nerves, due to which the insertion occurs.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Because one sets more on points the intestines if not put in gradually.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	As they swell quickly when they feel the cold, they return more to the points.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because it is better to treat a mid-sized wound, as one moves the intestines back to their place more than with other wounds.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the opening of the abdomen has four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common joints occur at the abdominal joint
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the joints of other wounds on the body, and two more specific joints are common for other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Furthermore, they are more appropriate with the abdominal joint, and I will explain one of them:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And great care is required when resetting [it], this is through one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or through the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the internal organs are swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten a sponge or a piece of fine linen cloth with cool water only.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	and you cook in boiling cypress and pine and spikewood.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and open the intestine as long as the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is boiled to soften to reduce inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling separate, if you moisten the intestines of cold or hot and ill-cooked water,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this means the entrance is closed to almost nothing.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut with an instrument used for coping with hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first remedy is to reduce the fracture
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	but we should not cut it too much without necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument to split it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it breaks through the neck and bends outward, then see its shape here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	then put it back in its natural shape at its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the power, for this is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large and it is in the part beneath the abdomen,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on their back.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raise their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	raise the head and the feet higher than the parts below.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And also if the hernia of the abdomen is in one of the two parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and you should know that the affected part should be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and in this way, you must apply what I say to both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use the appropriate remedy;
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then have between your hands a compassionate minister who anoints the entire wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common method of suturing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then, leave some distance from the wound (i.e., thumb space), and insert an awl with one thick strong thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two skins with the two chisels of the spatula.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join the two heads of the spatula together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then tie a double thread around the needle of .ij. parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then assemble the .ij. heads of the wound together.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave .i. two inches of space, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	Then tie the thread as you have done with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing so according to what you need for the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is bound.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	Subtle needles pierce the entire flesh, while the too large ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore they should be moderated.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and needles should not be pushed too far into the flesh and skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not pierce and open the wound before the seam.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	And then press the shoulders with needles, so they do not prick the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and place bands or cloths on the shoulders with needles to hold them in position.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	For he inflicts a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of flesh together with a needle that has one thick thread in the middle.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have sewn all four pieces together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reinsert the needle at the part where you started, in the manner as we usually do with threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch the thickness of a small egg;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching binds [the wound] together;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed a wound that a man had on his stomach,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than one palm wide (length),
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and the intestines were two palm widths long (length),
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	The wound was within the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I will return the intestines after they have been outside for 24 hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	The wound was sewn shut for fifteen days, and healed, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the monks had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And do not heal it with ointment, for I am in one place where none is found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And apply old cotton to the wound twice a day, and wash it with water of honey until it heals.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and thrust it from the outside part up to within there.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the heart straight through, place the head of the splint or cost where you inserted the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce from the other side of the inside out to the outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as pelters do fur.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave once the seam of one side, and return it from the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of stitching, which Galen specifically calls,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	as one does who assembles the two parts naturally together.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	And apply one of the heads of the lever to another head, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	thrust an awl or head of the mirror next to that place, and pierce it only there.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	leave the two heads of the lever;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the awl and pierce it from the outer side all the way to the inner part,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	2 heads of the shinbone;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and the other from the outer part to within, in 2 other shinbones that are on the opposite side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the muffled manner of stitching and the most common way.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen said this word, and no one can deny it;
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must sew the stomach with two needles, where there is thread on each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite, in the manner of those who sew purses.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	know that when the wound is within the stomach,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and the stitching in this part of the stomach is more difficult than other parts of the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the surgeon has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you replace the intestine, and its position; then place powder of arousing flesh on top.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the arm has been moved, put some ointment on it until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	Pull out the thread and sew up the wound, and apply the marrow.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the wound as with other cases, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicine, put on cotton wool immediately when it starts to heal;
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move it two times a day as long as it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need for any other medicine when the wounds are simple in many conditions.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound is affecting the main limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	You must soak linen lightly in warm oil or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And place it around the ankles, beneath the knees;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, and this often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if the cleansing with black vinegar softens, and especially when putrefaction reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce through it, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine known as "jeun" cannot heal when it is punctured.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is because of the inflammation in the veins that they are, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the herb jumps from the wound, place it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it becomes old or black, you must tie the part that is black so that blood does not come out from there.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then grip what is between the ribs.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound toward the side to align the extraction when the arrowhead falls, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some people,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen that a man was wounded or stabbed with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and windiness from it.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied a remedy according to what I knew, and continued to refine it until he was healed, and the wounds closed up.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw the wound close, I feared that the patient had an illness in his abdomen.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	But he had no ill health, but improved in better condition, and diet and drinks.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they said to any experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take firm hold of large testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the testicles have opened their mouth, place it on the two lips.
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that its mouth protrudes.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then grip the head, and hold it so that it cannot dislocate.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then place another plier after it in this manner until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head gets inflamed in the intestines, it causes no harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And it can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal.
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this thread made of intestine which is rather fine.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	then tie to the head of this thread (a) thin linen thread.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine, and straighten it in the incision;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of stitching wounds is not beyond the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, without remedy or health, it can only be done with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or when it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	All wounds or abscesses, when they heal, are universally referred to as "fistulas".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and likewise, when it is healed and bursts open again.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	A fistula is according to the truth a hard and white nodule, where no pain is felt,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it is as hollow as a bird's feather;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	Sometimes it jumps clearly upwards, and other times thickens;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes narrow, and other times quite wide;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	I have spoken of wounds in the division of injuries, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is not by any of the eight causes: [This sentence doesn't have a subject or verb in Old French, so I couldn't translate it literally as it would be incorrect.]
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it means by the smallness of blood or body: [This sentence is saying that something is caused by the smallness of either the body or the amount of blood.] In this case, the sentence seems to be stating that dislocation might be caused by a lack of blood or a small body. However, since we don't know what the "eight causes" are in the context of this text, we can't accurately translate this sentence without more information about those causes.
ou por sa malice;	or by its wickedness: [In this case, the sentence is saying that something might be caused by its own inherent wickedness.] In the given context, it seems that the speaker is suggesting that dislocation might occur because of some inherent issue with the joint itself. However, without more information about what "dislocation" refers to or the context of the text, we can't accurately translate this sentence into English.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	For because there is hard flesh within and above the lips, do not let it grow flesh.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	For there is too much pus.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	The loins are swollen, and the matter is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	The medicine is not good for the treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	For, because corruption is a form of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	For, due to the property in that area, digestion is slow, health is delayed, and it naturally swells.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the treatments with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must tell you the remedy for a fistula made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from the veins, arteries, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in one of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the property of the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all these fistulas are of grave illness, and there is only labor and ignorance in them.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is any fistula that does not reach up to the level I have said, and you have confidence in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you investigate it, if you take a tent of bee wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, push it through.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, search for a thin reed stick,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the reed bends around the twist;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	And if the fistula (a small abnormal passage or cavity) at the hand has been torn apart, you cannot find it again with probing,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	If the hernia (protrusion of an organ or tissue through a weak spot in the surrounding muscle or connective tissue) has come out through one of the openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because moisture is so short from one opening to another, and it should be cleaned.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then carefully probe it to the best of your ability to determine if there is bone or nerve involved and whether it is fully closed.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	And ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press on it with your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	In any of the places that I have told you, if the edge is cut according to what I have told you.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And bone should be removed from the fracture and the corrupt cartilages that are within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the cure until it is healed.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well penetrated straight through, it is necessary that you close it completely, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I put dampened tents filled with medicine into the fistula, and push them up to its head,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	As long as the medicine corrodes the surplus that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put warm bandages on the healthy flesh, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this means, then cauterize as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, break it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or nerves do not burden or main members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, wait until all the corruption is removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal it with soothing salves until it heals completely;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	if it does not heal and bows again as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	Know that you are not yet at the fountain:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	cover and remain as long as you are at the bottom.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	remove all corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	if it is in such a state, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that corruption is too far advanced, that you cannot reach it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy but to let nature take its course.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone corruption, and you can extract it with pliers.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if it can be extracted with one tool.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there are many bones, draw them all out, do not leave any of them.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	cover and moisten and wrap the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something warm and moist over the wound,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	And let [the joint] be surrounded by tendons around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And then [it will be] easier to move the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	let [the bone] remain until all the blackness is removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part corrupting down to the bone:
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to be covered entirely up to the corruption, and then heal it until it heals over.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you about a fistula that happens to one man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man of around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within his body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the matter came to his leg, and it was burst out with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it further.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the fools, through their folly, overdid (the incision) so much that the abscess opened
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they dug too much into matters, and it became a fistula, and much pus came out that everyone bent down with moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many fools put cures on it for two years but there was no healer skilled in medicine.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I was called to see the leg and the medicines with which they were treating it,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And those who run through wounds with great haste;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the bodies of the young men turn red, and they have a yellow complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent at one of these wounds, then searched for all the wounds,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that the one was coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I therefore hastened, and cut into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it corrupt and rotten, and the corruption reached the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I considered that there was no other corruption in the bone than what remained;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with salve for a long time, but it would not close.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	And then examine [the area] and uncover the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And find the continuous corruption in the bone, and I cleaned it, and then left it open, and then tried to mend the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not join it altogether as I wrapped around a palm of the bone, and pulled it too hard.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then I restored it with medicines; and it healed and mended quickly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And it should not begin work again except due to the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For due to the blood evacuation it often happened, but he was completely healthy,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And there grew a hard cartilage in the place of the bone, and it was well-placed and had no harm or opposite effect anywhere, neither at arrival nor at coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken at any location of the body, it should be treated as follows:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take a splint, and hold it at the open end of the broken bone,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command anyone that it should be extended upward;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another thicker splint of linen on top of the skin covering the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And extract the corrupt flesh beneath the skin of the head,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and expose the flesh on the surface where you want to be, so that the bone does not prick the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a splint or a flat piece of wood underneath the bone to protect the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	It must be as much as possible to see and feel the corruption, and be checked again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then put a splint underneath; afterwards, heat it with a hot iron.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and let the splint be from one part of the corruption to the other, and let the splint be the length of the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is at the joint, strike the corrupted joint and the bone that it contains from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cover [the affected area].
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if corruption is in the end of the hand or the foot, it is a very difficult matter.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	But it is necessary that you investigate this corruption, how it opened.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in all the ways you can, but do not harm the vein or the nerve.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that the incision tool and the saws for covering these bones are numerous, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for that reason, it is necessary to equip each type of work with its appropriate tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Choose the instrument that you need according to what is required.
dou feu	the fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The cheeks may swell due to something inside or outside.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have remedied this corrosion through the use of medications, but they do not help at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes from.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient may perish from this through death or through a greater ill-will due to the failure of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the member becomes black as if it were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And then comes the blackness, afterwards goes the corruption of member to member,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	It takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten to cover it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if this is by the bite of certain venomous creatures such as sea scorpions and snakes and similar,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the corruption is at the head of the neck, if you cover it, do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, strike at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	If it reaches the forearm, strike at the edge; if it passes the edge, that is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no use in applying remedies outside of its quantity of virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and act accordingly when the corruption comes or is putrefied: if it comes in the first joint, strike after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or falls, cover all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it goes up in the leg, cover at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, there is no remedy for the sick but death.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the method of covering or caring for the limb is such that you bind it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	extend one minister one of the lower straps, and another minister the other strap upward.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you cut open the flesh between the two straps one thumbwidth wide, so that the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then you cover or bandage it, putting on one side a linen cloth, so that the wound does not touch healthy flesh.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And comes another injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if bleeding comes when you work, then cauterize the area quickly,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then tie the limb with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to one person in the leg:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a dark swelling that looked like it was burned by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corruption first appeared in his thigh bone, until it covered the entire thigh.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the bones see corruption, he strikes them with copper [instrument] and makes them healthy.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards corruption or decay of the hand returned to him, and it came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed him in restorative things after the body's cleansing, but the corruption could not stop.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and you request that I cut off his hand, but I do not want, for I have hope of restoring the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	And also doubted if I were to amputate his hand, he would not die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the virtue of man was weak; and he lost all hope, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and if I strike his hand with a sword, it will be well (healed).
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have not thought of anything else except that this can be done differently if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	An abscess sometimes appears in a charred area and remains for so long that it causes a large swelling of boils.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then they run and pierce, and the boil bursts, and the place becomes visible, like a wound of a knight;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above it is as thin as a piece of linen unraveled;
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not reach the bone or the nerve, and such illness is called "sain".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it extends all the way to the bone in depth, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cook should be such that you cut through the entire hide, and in the same way when it is subtle, like a cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not disappear due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have a suspicion that the flesh is hardening, and the corruption is not complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with pus, cure it with clisteria (a medicinal enema):
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	check if the breasts are swollen and the boil that is in it has a foul smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then apply Egyptian medicinal clisteria (enema) made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, and cook them in one vessel over fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and thickens to the consistency of honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take according to your need from it, and make it into an ointment and a syrup,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and apply the poultice to the breast, and compress the wound;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine inside for 2 hours, then draw it out by pulling.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breast is drained of pus;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes cleansed with water and ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, take vine ash, pour water over it,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then let it bleed, and anoint it with ointment, until you know that the breasts are well healed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	if the patient cannot bear it, nor Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if you anoint it with water and honey or a little powdered gallstones.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you anoint it with honey and sweetened wine, where the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	And the wine makes the blood thin;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have confidence that the breasts are well cleansed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the suppository made to stimulate chyme in him,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you shall prepare an emulsion of pennyroyal and make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	and you shall coat it with certain medicines and liniments, of which I have spoken about their properties or treating the liniments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if the breast wound is small, and the linen cloth of the liniment cannot enter.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If a wound caused by a small knife is large, put an Egyptian ointment plaster over it.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilicon ointment, as long as it is large;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, cut and leave one to two leagues or the lancet can enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the hernia that bulges is above, press it down or lower than it.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is fully drawn, do not let it release the arrow.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	arrange it in such a manner that the bow bends to its lowest point.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the boil is fully formed, do not let it burst.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see.
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	arrange it in this manner: let the boil run easily downwards, and do not leave anything of the boil.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	take consolidating medicine for putting on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And stretch over it a linen cloth that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then press the force against the wound of the breast with something wider than the first (pressure).
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then anoint it softly with another cloth according to the size of the wound,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and lay it on the wound of the breast to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And he who is on the breastbone, often opens for removing the break,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	knows what comes from the break, if it's poisonous or infected or digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	takes care whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	when your medicine has been applied in this way and you see the nature that rises on the breastbone.
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that breasts swell up, then approach them with care;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and in the morning or at midday, when you are about to open the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	change one bandage for another, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the breasts are swollen and do not improve after several days, know that they will not swell further.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons attack after a long time, do not despair of health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	for the healing approaches. For there are people whose wounds heal slowly, and those who make it worse.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if a badly digested bowel moves through the chest after many days, know that breasts do not move.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts are slow to grow, and are swollen, apply drying medicine with moist substance and dry qualities.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As an ointment defined, for it contains much vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take ointment defined, made with rose oil, and rosehips of equal substance in quantity.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook and apply it; and the same made in a more cooked state, swollen,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when ointment defined is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is over the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	Then place one cloth and lay it on the chest, and sometimes administer an aromatologist long oil.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is as fine as flour and cinnamon.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder and put it on the honey that I mentioned, and use.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the patient is prolonged (i.e., not healed), and is not cured by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	therefore learn that corruption is imminent, and it creates pressure on the bone, or on hard members, or ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of this fistula, as we have said before, does not heal the patient.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess at the nailbed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Pancreatic abscess is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or under the toe, or by chance it may arise in other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it becomes inflamed and no care is taken, an abscess forms.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they cut and throw boils until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance they may cut it entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the corruption to the bone, until it brings pain that smells, and the head is wide open, and the color is drained away.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help at all.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	Then you must cut into it. Remove all the excess that remains from the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and when the nail follows the flesh closely, and it begins to swell and crack,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	you must put the radish under the nail to prevent the flesh from touching;
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	And raise it up, and strike the flesh gently and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and place on top of the remaining flesh the remnant of the medicine that is burning and corrosive to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	If the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and draw out pus, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see the thumb bent, strike it with a hammer as previously mentioned,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wounded, broken, and causing great pain, it must be drained first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then strike the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse cutting motion from above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And be careful that the cut does not reach down to the flesh below the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If it happens, place something on top to alleviate the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deaf man's hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The patient must cauterize who is born in some men's hands by chance, it is all fleshly.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is bone or nail, and occasionally there is a nail.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born in the root of the joint, but rather in some of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	The one who is born in any nail does not grow out,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And if one is born at the join of the thumb, by chance he remains mute;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that who is fat is light, in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the length in its root like a broad spoon.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	If one is born at the root of the join, he is difficult to cure; keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or about to die, it is necessary that you cut the cartilage roundly up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with an appropriate saw for this, then cure it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same sores that come at the joints come together by birth, or by injury of a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to cut the sore, so that it can heal according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or damp cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	and you put thin pieces of wood between them so that the joints are glued together, as necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	In the same way, if any of his hands comes with the palm, then strike that joint as necessary.
Des vils	Of people
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are large, swollen vessels filled with melancholic excesses, which come into many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And it happens more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must sometimes administer purge of bile, and then let it flow from the basilica (biliary duct).
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is to hit them, and the black blood is drained out.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to open a vein and let it bleed completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision method is as follows: first make an incision on the leg with very hot water until the flesh softens.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then open the vein in one, two, or three places, of a wide size,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then draw and let out the black blood from the one end to the other, as much black blood from it as the strength of the patient can withstand.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it up, and instruct him to bind himself with meat colored black.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, it is beneficial for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The swelling of it [the affected area] is as follows: measure the limb of the patient, if there is much hair on it,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then place it in water, and raise the limb in warm water until it turns red and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have water, heat it on fire, and then press it against the vein along the length of the thigh or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then scrape the skin with a knife at the edge, and cut open the vein from both sides, until it appears when you feel it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And one sees it red and black, and when it enters or skin resembles a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then push the rod inside until it reaches the skin, and then pierce it gently.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then strike it in another place four fingers' breadth away; then peel the skin over the vein as far as it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then tie the rod to the vein, as you did, and pierce it again at another angle, as you did before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then take another size, or more if needed, then warm it, and apply to the base of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then straighten and warm up to the second size; then cut it piece by piece until it comes out completely, and apply.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, push an awl with a single strong double thread through it.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	Hold the awl straight and draw it out, then turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep it from bruising, for if it bruises, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and harm comes to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it, place on the wound a cloth dampened with vinegar and rose oil; and let it heal until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the wound is contracted, twisted, and rolled together, not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	Then you must cut it obliquely, but do not cover it; and draw it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein is curved and does not cut, it should not pierce the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of large curve, for if it is subtle, it would pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein (a blood vessel)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is opened in legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in ground where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it grows elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to the corruption coming from under the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	if it comes inside the body and spreads, open between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	If the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very large inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then change the joints, and start the vein to come out, as a root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder is open, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of wood from 6 to 8 inches long and bind it.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it comes loose from the wound, wrap it again around the wood and bind it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut a part of it and roll up the remaining, do not cover it at its root until it comes out completely.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, cause an abscess and pus or a bad illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because of that, it must be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	sometimes this vein is about five fingers long or ten,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And one man came to me, whose length was ten feet, and when you cut it, push a pound or a hole through it, and pierce it all the way down,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything inside is emptied out; and bring the matter within it to its place, and apply the medicine in the form of poultice for three days, then treat it as an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes with this vein, many raindrops come out, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or hand,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And it comes much from ruptures, and where it jumps around; cure it then as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From worms that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often occurs in cows.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body swelling and subsiding,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	It sends [the patient] great pain from member to member as it desires, until it breaks the skin or jumps forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	It is poisoned by corruption of some humors, such as those that come towards and resemble snakes, worms, and parasites or the stomach;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, it ascends to the head, and reaches the eye;
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance, oil enters [the body] and is destroyed; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you want to cure and draw it, one can only force it when it wants to go out:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	Therefore, you must tie the loin (intestines) above and below with a strong, narrow cord:
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then press above and pull out forcefully, and if the head is full in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm that it does, is that it runs the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold a bellows under it, then strike above, and draw it out;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and the patient must use a bodily cleansing of medicinal solutions to remove harmful humors;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if they are spoiled with meat poisoning.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from wind-sickness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "wakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and it moves from member to member; as I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of her arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And afterward, it began to rise like a worm towards the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more quickly than anything else, as hot iron when it is cut from one piece to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain spread from that place and pierced into the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then a little while after it runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I saw that it would repeatedly turn around the body.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly surprised how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this kind of disease in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Indeed, I had seen many cases where the pain moved from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	But I had not wanted it, as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins exposed.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this, the constrictions of wind appear;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not apply to those who are healthy and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you wish to cure this disease, and the patient feels this pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	press down hard on both sides and then push upwards until the windiness is constrained to its place.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the spot; if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If the treatment for those suffering from windiness is like poison pills or Serapion pills, and similar ones.
Des saiettes	If the treatment for those suffering from windiness are arrows or needles.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows or needles come in different types, depending on their shapes and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity among them is that there are some with large points, small ones, rounded, and pointed.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those with two joints, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are parts or fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	And the dislocation in any limb occurs in two ways: either in the principal member, the head,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	If the dislocation occurs in any of these members, then the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter will be apparent to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	It is necessary for you to be cautious about the extraction of this arrow, for many deaths follow in various situations.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully inserted, draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when an arrow pierces the bone and the socket that is above the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when the eye becomes cloudy and swollen, and inflamed and red around it, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And by chance, it may occur without force from the nostrils or ears; and by chance, speech and voice may be lost.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And from the wound white moisture jumps out, resembling pus, and also jumps like boiling oil.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	If this sign appears, refrain from the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels like it has been stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance, the seventh becomes mute like hair, and in black blood it bleeds, and there comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, one can doubt that death is coming.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that pierces the body is when a scab does not rise from the wound and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, breathes heavily and seeks warm air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrow falls on the bed of the sick person, it has pierced the sides; and he spits a large amount of saliva and feels great pain and breathes heavily; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead or stomach falls out by chance, anything from the undigested flesh may jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrowhead or abdomen falls out and something from the intestinal tract jumps out, there is no hope in the treatment nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the arrowhead falls into the bladder and urine jumps out and spills, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the hand, arm, neck, shoulder, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and those similar, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason you should do something else.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man that an arrow struck or pierced the root of his neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I pulled it out from the other side under the fat of the ear and it was harmless without any damage.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I played a game with an arrow that struck in the oil sac under the paper,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow was inserted, and it could not reach beyond its point towards the bone.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all one piece of light iron without ears; the patient recovered, and no harmful accident occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	It passed an arrow through the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I was a barber, and I was skillful enough to pull it out, and the Christian recovered.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And take an arrow out of one man who was shot or stabbed, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days, his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, pulled it out, and had no bad outcome.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	If one man is shot or stabbed, and the wound is sewn shut;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	And the arrow remained inside it, and did not change its natural position.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor was found detrimental in any of its natural workings.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And a man, who got an arrow in his face, and the wound became closed.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and it remained thus without suffering great pain for a long time, and many similar things happened.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And treat an arrow wound in a knight of the king who was struck within the neck,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely buried.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was summoned to the treatment after it happened seven days ago. I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I stretched it with a fine tent and felt no pain.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I applied the plaster attractant and digestif because the wounds did not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw the arrowhead of the wound.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I place the plaster on the wound for many days, and straighten the fracture directly, and keep the patient for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he feels the arrowhead inside his neck for one day; then tell him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put a corrosive medicine on the wound by hand, until it is opened.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and probe it, and feel the head of the arrow that adheres to the place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I align in the opening of the wound with that ague medicine, until the head of the arrow becomes visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and he passed well beyond the four-month term.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I cut open the wound that I had punctured with the pincers, and it refused to heal from one side or the other.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I took the pincers well made for a whole day.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to its form that will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I follow it and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judges decide that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restore it, and the wound heals, and the patient is completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	And I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you apply your remedy to this (condition), I do not say that you should not do otherwise, because the books cannot completely grasp everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters comprehend little things and things that are present and failing.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	True nine times out of eleven, and nine times are the instruments, in the examination of things strange that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not enter into limbs where they are thrust except according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	Or by what side they enter, or from another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out where it enters is an arrow penetrating into the flesh, and jumps out occasionally.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is swollen around it and the opening is closed;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is driven into the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, pierce it all around with a fine needle, until the joints around it are opened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is lodged in the skull bone, and goes to one of the brain ventricles,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said to the patient: do not drain it at all, but let it heal evenly after several days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow reaches the heart, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is inserted only into the bone and does not reach the heart,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	The patient remains for some days with no bad accidents, if the device to draw it is used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply inserted and cannot come out, then administer tourniquets around it, as I told you before; then heal the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is placed back in the body where it cannot be seen, you should seek it with all your might;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, you must draw it out with any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow prevent it,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, nerve, or vein if the wound is large enough;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	And pull the arrow out if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow as it is,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	and remove the foreign body that is embedded in two parts into the muscle as far as you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the arrow's ears until you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	be careful not to break the arrow, but try to pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, pull down the leg to the joints, then draw, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if bleeding prevents you from performing the extraction, bring forth what we have said in its chapter for treatment;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and use devices as you can pull out the arrow without risk.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow struck him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For it is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot do it, have it done as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, or it opens something of it, or the skin is swollen around it, as one can see or feel clearly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Then cut through it, as long as the tweezers can take hold, and then pull it out; if it is not possible to do so now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it [the dislocation] is held within the bone, you should turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, you should leave it for a while, and then continue the extraction until it comes forth.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is of an arrow shaft, push it all the way through;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it fell and you want to administer a poultice, then administer one poultice made with cheese;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the point of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; then force it through.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the arrow is entangled (or caught) in the hair, apply force to the instrument, causing the pointed end to penetrate and ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touching (or lodged in) something, you should cut all the flesh around the area where the poison is present, if possible.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or pierces in the belly, bladder, side, or kidney, and it is nearby, and you can cover over it, then do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And keep from covering the vein and the nerve, then extract it, then stitch the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and care for it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the boil is also like a bird's feather,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push the point of the arrowhead in this manner:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tweezers for pushing and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Incisions of the common body cavities
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Incisions for draining are 31, of which there is a head of 16
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This means: Two pans that are after the ears, which are called "double herb"
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins which are in each eye, called "aspirates".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	The vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two tendons which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	And the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the middle part is called "fast," and it consists of the cephalic and basilic.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And common people call it "vein of the abdomen," and it is above the liver.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	This is the one that is used for bloodletting, which opens clearly at the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the savatal is the vein which is between the auricular and annular [bones], and it has two rain(s).
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and foot there are four veins: one is under the calf of the left side.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphenous vein which is at the wrist of the right side; and the vein called "nisse," which is in the wrist of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are 3 veins beneath those [veins].
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The veins that follow the ears help the ancient catarrhs and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the vein, as I say to you, are such that you rise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	As long as the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Then, where you feel the pulse beneath your neck, press firmly.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lance, and push it through the vein to the bone, then withdraw your hand along the entire vein,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Cut through the skin and vein with two blows, and make the blood come out until you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then hold and bind it, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, is worth to migraine old-age people,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And it is also sooty and inflammation of the eyes, and to the heart of cold eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of the healer are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient stretches out his neck, until two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse beneath your thumb, and then examine it carefully;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lift the finger to the upper part of the vein on your index finger, and push the lancet underneath;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Lift the vein up, strike it (as you have done in two other veins), and draw the blood as necessary.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form (the incision) carefully, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their dressing and extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the forehead vein is worth as much as the healing of the head vein for facial diseases such as migraines and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is such that the patient stretches his neck while turning, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "excavator", whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let blood flow according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then separate the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is sealed and not open one time with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	In addition, the flames should not be too sharp; and obliquely, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames may break when they are fine.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The veins of the two eyelids assist in the eyes, and in the tear duct, and in the nostrils, and in the ear in oil, and in facial diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their veins is such that the patient can strain his neck by twisting some rope or cord, as previously mentioned.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then, make it healthy, and let the incision be across [the affected area], a bit long and wide, for there is no flesh therein.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the fire is thin, perhaps it may break; then correct the blood flow, as much as you need, and then cover it with linen, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The incision of the vein near the neck is good for ague, scrofula, and fevers caused by corruption.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as well as migraines and redness that come from the face, especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the qualities of the purgative are that the patient compresses their neck, then holds their genitals with your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a subtle long flame, and thrust it between the two nostrils in the space,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well in this way, and the arteries will soon begin to bleed;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too far forward, make the wound cauterize according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is soon healed.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This is the form of fire (cautery):
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The salve of two kinds (guides) helps in the strengthening of the sinews, and at the beginning of inflammation, and in many diseases, and in stopping abscesses, and in corroding, and in sores, and in ulcers.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the salve is such that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient lie on one seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then let the vein heal along its length for a short distance, then draw out the blood moderately, as necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then reset (the dislocation) on the other side, then undo the ligament, and hold the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Do not squeeze (the wound); let it heal by itself until morning, so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	On the treatment of boils
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of mouth boils also helps with cold in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and cuts and sores around the mouth.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the salve are to make the patient sit before you, and hold its neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the jaw, and look at the two veins, one on the right jaw and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they are recognized by being black, and by the small black veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Then take one or the other (the shoulder), and if you do not know them, and you are uncertain,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then take the largest one of each pair (shoulders), and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the incision under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The incision under the tongue helps after the cephalic incision, and it is used for the treatment of throat diseases, eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the qualities of a blood-letter are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up the tongue, and looks under each side at a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	And so both sides, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins along the side from which blood-letting is commonly done are done according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by puncturing with a sharp point made of myrtle wood or fine olive oil, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It must be necessary to open large veins with visible thick blood, and those containing thick and troubled blood:
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	This is the form of the olive oil lamp:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for healing subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the healer to heal promptly, and to drain the artery that is beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	If he pierces the artery, and blood flow comes out, it should be stopped, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame must not be pressed, but cut as with a saw.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open naturally, you must force it and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you want any wound from him, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens naturally.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cup to the flame anneal, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place of the wound, then you must also stretch out the arm and touch the place where you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the place with a sign, tie up the arm, and heat the vein with fire.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery; avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rise high as a child's urine, and the limb is red and thin, know that this is not from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Then place your finger firmly on top, press down for a long time, then cut off the limb where it turns pale repeatedly, as this often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave the arm alone and do not move it, the patient should be afraid and not move it until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the limb is not bleeding and it pains you, and there is no medicine present, then cut open the artery if it opens, because the head of the limb will retreat; stop the bleeding from the limb.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a bark of fustic, cut it, and take one half of it and bind it tightly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it does not stop bleeding, that's fine; if it does not, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stoppage of bleeding is not necessarily helpful in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the bandage on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above, and from the body below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the lord must turn it by the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the patient suffers pain, and there is no healing.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve opens widely many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then you must anesthetize the area with the instrument; and press the nerve as hard as you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The pain of the skull helps, which draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to anesthetize by pressing on the olive oil or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins because there is no nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Therefore, one must seek the easier joint, and not worry if it is necessary to do it for the first time, and one can repeat.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes joints swell in some men, which requires it for the first time, but do not worry about it.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of urine is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about urinating is that urination serves only for maintaining health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	And to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And the incision should be made in one of the four veins that are known as: cephalic, femoral, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should incise at the beginning of the thigh, in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And one should incise on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The administration of medicine for diseases has no fixed hour, but when it is needed, day or night, in every hour and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not advisable to treat children under the age of 14 or a woman carrying child for less than four months up until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Old people over sixty years old should not be treated.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to be treated in any manner, it is necessary that the intestines should be cleansed with a mild cleansing agent.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If much filth is retained, to the extent that veins do not expel intestinal waste from the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor is he healthy who is excessively salted with meats, or drunk, to such an extent that he is feverish or dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if diarrhea occurs after a colic attack, vomiting, abdominal distention, multiple abortion of a woman, excessive labor, watching, and fasting, or total loss of strength due to the weapon or body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the bodily fluids, if it is swollen, by means of food and drinks and medications, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and let the blood flow from the vein on the affected side, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep yourself that day from labor, exertion, lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And bind and hold the patient, raise the surgeon's hand higher than the patient, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then gently pull the ligament above, as when it is too tight or narrow, it cannot be corrected without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the area with hands until the veins swell, and feel them to ensure they are swollen.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	and then wet the surgeon's hand with a little oil, then place his fingertip of his left hand on the vein below the area where he will lance it.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	That the vein does not open nor break at the incision.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run like ropes in a sieve, and some are filled with venosity,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For when heat is applied, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some of them.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if they open a vein, the wound is too narrow, so the surgeons should be mindful of this.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If it opens the first time, that's fine; but if not, restart from the same place or shortly thereafter, unless the limb is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	If the limb is swollen and the patient becomes fearful, wait one or two days and do not tie up the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	In case pus ulcers arrive, they should not enter baths or water; then start treating the wound again if it pleases them.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the perforation is small or the wound subtle, and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, trust in the perforation itself entirely with all the flame directly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	Work it a little hastily, so that the flesh is inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the flesh inflamed, do not start draining it, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is healed.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And so administer the oil of lard in every wound that you cleanse the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And similarly use treacle and boil it when putting it on the wound; if it becomes too thick, thin it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	If an abscess becomes large, which happens many times, similarly when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hurry, place a damp sponge soaked in vinegar and a little hot oil on it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for some days without any black or green discoloration, it does not matter.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh that has been steeped in calcament, mastic, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often abscess and appearance appear at the healing of the basilica: place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to pressure from the hand, then that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not put anything above what has been said, because by chance without the artery; but let it be one plug of dry material to harden the place, then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw out blood from each person according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is filled and hollowed out, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed a little and often, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bloodletting is safe from the corruption of blood and the compression of nerves, and it is more effective than long bloodletting or wide bloodletting.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for the one whose body needs to be purged, it is necessary to give soft bread with pulp of pomegranates; if he is hot, bleed him four or five times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of cold complexion, eat before purging soft bread in syrup, or syrup of honey aromatic with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	If he has diarrhea during purging, after the flow of blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat and a subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And use other things as we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If you want to dislocate someone's arm and then relocate it at another time, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be done little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to dislocate someone's arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong heart, should wait 9 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to be bled from another part, should be bled on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood inside the body which is already overheated and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw a large quantity and widen the opening until it can pass through.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	and reward all the conditions of health, place your hand on top of the foot when it is healthy, so that death does not come in its place.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary that you dislocate the arm again, draw blood a second time, and the wound is closed, but you should press firmly.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is curved, extend the arm forcefully, for it would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but leave it until it heals the second time; or you pierce it with the point of the flame, until the congealed blood that was in the vein escapes.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and place one piece of fresh linen in boiling water and press lightly on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if a vein has burst, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess is pacified.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If it requires drawing blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is safer to use instead of the one in the neck because it is composed of different vessels.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	The way to draw blood is that the patient pushes their hand into boiling hot water until the vein turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then keep pressing gently across, neither too wide nor too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make the incisions wide, and press well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be extracted, place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out in the hot water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, do not plunge the hand into hot water, as it puts it more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, for there is no artery or nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The swelling of the vein of the right hand is worth all liver diseases, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	press the hand, and put in hot water until the vein swells up if you can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	If the wound is transverse, and if you close it completely, it will cause no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all exposed under skin.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Then put your hand in hot water, if the wound is frozen and cannot be extracted.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood as much as needed, put oil and linen over the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purification of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of paralysis, and it should be done in the same way as I told you concerning the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The purification of the sole is beneficial for all the diseases that are beneath the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the womb, retention of flow (menses), disease of the kidneys and thighs, and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the qualities of its purification are that the patient should immerse his foot in hot water and rub it on the vein until it bleeds,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And lay it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many rivers.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Then, lay it on the larger river or at the ankle, which flows more easily.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you lay it on the leg below, watch out for nerves that are beneath it, and lay it through just as in cutting; let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the leg cannot be extracted, place it in the water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the blisters require treatment for the first time, start with the second one slightly above, because the area is salted;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and proceed with the same method for the sole of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The salted area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its blister is worth the pain of the heel when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the qualities of its blister are that the patient immerses it in water and squeezes above the ankle four fingers' width.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	Otherwise, the vein will not open; and if it opens, heal it in all possible ways that you can, and by crossing over.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	It is better to close it, because the place is empty, and it is much more vulnerable to hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you don't bind it, there will be no blood to stop its opening or the top of the foot, and beware of nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	Make as much pressure on the blood as you can see, then untie the string, and place cotton on it and bind it again; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	From the blisters (of cupping)
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blisters (of cupping) are made from horns or goat's horn, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by bleeding and drawing blood, or without bleeding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this type of cupping that does not involve bleeding is done in two ways: either it is done by fire, or without fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And the cupping that involves bleeding is made in twelve parts of the body.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	The patient is either completely unconscious (asleep) or dead, the others are moved to the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two more in the sides of the neck; and the bladder underneath the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the bladders of the two shoulders; and the bladders above the ankles;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the bladders in the two arms; and the bladders in the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the boils of the two shins; and the boils do not bleed, unless from small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason, do not open them at all, as one does with bloodletting from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered in any case, neither with hot water nor heated water, in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	If it is necessary for diseases to bleed, or according to custom, we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at every time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need to ventose, have heavy heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and those who find swelling and redness in their belly, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who have a drop of blood in their mouth and have swollen tongues, and exude blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if [there are] some who think, and see by no blood or abscesses or death or similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	When we see these signs and especially when it is in the month [of the disease], we order to bleed after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The purging of the muzzle helps with the gritting of the teeth ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the entire body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this ventosation is in the location of the head of the cervical (spine)
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it should not be used by those with cold constitution or who have scabies, for it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore the elderly should not use it, nor those with head colds diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves become obtuse, and for this reason, the blister should be placed a little lower due to the risk of becoming obtuse.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The ventosation is placed on the neck at the base of the skull and in the basilica, and for that reason it is useful for the stretching of the bones.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to cut through the channel of the vertebra, and immediately, and to be filled up.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	It must be pushed gently, for if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction or blockage in the belly or in the heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are useful for headaches, migraines, strangulation and pain in the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it should be in the position of the basilica's sacred place; and you must instruct the lord to press his hand to put it, not strike the artery, and no bleeding should come.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilations under the chin are good for mouth disease and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it should be in the positions of the two cheeks.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilations of the shoulders are good for disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventosations of the sides are as valuable as three veins from the arms.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the lord not to cut too deeply, for the veins are naked of flesh, and it knows beneath dark and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The boil on the buttock is effective for treating hemorrhoids at their base and diseases underneath, and it should be large and made of lard, as it needs to be well-drawn; and if it were subtle, it would break; and in that case, it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The boils on the legs open widely because they draw blood from the whole body, and they are effective for treating old pains in the joints, such as those of the knees and ankles, and they remove the flower; and they are located between the shins and the knees, and the ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring down pus in various dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the boil is that you put it first and apply it promptly, press it evenly, and continue this action until you see the place turning red and swelling, and opening the redness of blood; then wait and put the boils back, taking care in the disposition of the body, as there are those with soft skin and clear pores: it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make wide and deep wounds, and a little superficially.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the limb is thick, it should be cut twice: the first time to make a path for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the limb is very thick, it should be cut three times; and when we want to draw out the thin blood, we only need to prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	If we want much blood, we should encourage it frequently; and if the limb is thick, we pierce deeply and let the veins be punctured suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and are narrow-pored, that you anoint the joints of the swellings with stimulating and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this case, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from the seeds of cucumbers.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in a fever, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluidity is large and cold, take amat oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others like it.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if one to whom you are applying hot iron has wide and large pores, no oil should be applied.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it should be washed after the application with rose water, or cold water, or water of morello cherries, or water of gourd, or water of pottery, or any similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And one who has much moisture, if he rises from bed, should do so with asafetida or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And one with large superfluidities rises with old wine or grape juice, or the infusion of anise or chamomile, or similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And it is not advisable to bleed with a cupping glass before bathing nor in the bath, but an hour or two after bathing, and one should not sleep after cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary that he urinate, when he should be bled and after being bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	Watch the one who bleeds is bilious, and if he is not enough or too inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It is necessary for him to take cold things, such as raw pomegranates, endives and lettuce leaves; and similar items.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and also consume purgatives, meat of the chestnut, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold constitution, should take honey syrup, fragrant moderate wine (between old and new), purgatives, and also consume parsnips, small birds, and young birds.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	On the day he will vomit, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give some men sometimes triticale or muscatel before swelling, or after, for strengthening the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And thin the blood of those who are hot, but it is not necessary that those who are cold drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The boils placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach, intestines, and hernia, as these members cannot bear to be pierced,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And they do not make him do it except to draw blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put on the breasts when the milk is thick in the member, to remove the viscosity that is in the body, just as we put leeches on the belly and the buttocks to reduce the body.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain when there is an abscess or stone, it removes by its virtue attracting accidentally the abscess, or dislodges the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and in this way, it does when placed on the liver and the spleen when there is retained wind,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these blisters are treated empty to be sucked only; and sometimes they are treated with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of the lungs, and in this way the blister is filled with hot water or water in which cooked healing herbs have been steeped.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the blister to be treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth wide, and have one small hole, as for pushing an awl,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it should be made of iron, soft before so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to put a handle on it;
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and let them be large or small depending on the diseases and age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the blisters of children are different from those of the elderly, and thin from thick ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should put this blister on the member thusly:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take a beeswax candle or thread, and place it through the blister at the center which is in the blister,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the light is at the bottom of the blister so as not to burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then lay it on the member, and your fingers should be above the wound as we have said, so that when one sees, if there is steam, one removes the bladder.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	Then take the linen thread as before and reinforce it often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the bladder used in disease of pleurisy, there is no vein or wound, and it is not brought unless when it is full of liquid, and it is placed only on the member.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Sanguisettes are not introduced except in members where bandages cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare flesh, like the buttocks or genitals, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and if the quality of the patient is such that when you find sanguisettes in sweet clean waters without purulence, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a new container of sweet water until they are familiar with it and have nothing inside.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then let it be drained of vein and abscess, then rub the member until it turns red and put on plasters.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and hot, if it is possible to apply a leech, do so, for it is very helpful.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the affected limb and immerse it in warm water, then wrap it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the healthy limbs become cold due to the plasters, immerse one linen cloth in cold water and place it on until the wound is healed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the wound is multiplying, place it on crushed glass or vitriol, and similar things, until it scabs over.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	And you place half-peeled beans on the wound and leave them until they scab over at the site, it will stop now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if more help is needed, take other willows.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the willows do not want to be taken, rub the wound with fresh blood or insert a needle until the juice flows out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then lay them down (the limbs), and as soon as they feel the blood, let them harden.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	When you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little aloe vera and lin powder or ashes on it, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures (breaks)
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear child, that the foolish fool casts himself out of this chapter, who will never see any old books, nor read any letter in them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, science is alienated from our land, because I have never found anyone good at it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing else, except through the knowledge of old books, where I have studied extensively to treat the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we explain the summary of this book's content and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	When any break or dislocation, twisting or distortion comes to anyone, you must hasten to heal the patient on both sides, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or the elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the time is not too hot or too cold, avoid eating cold foods, such as frosty meat and mutton or veal eyes, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of the abscess heating up, or of the spread of matter to the limb; if the patient follows these primary rules that he has used before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed on foods that cause thick stools, or have viscosity like cooked barley in water and peas, and beef, and pork, and veal, and mutton, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this thick stool, the healing of the fracture is quicker.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and debilitated cannot be well healed or repaired according to their nature due to the relaxation of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But has no cure, reset on the broken bone.i.e. large splints which press and join the limb together, as much as it was before; and do not let him move at all from his work, and for this reason he should be fed with large foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head (skull) is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture which goes towards the elbow, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each type has its tool and instrument proper for restoration, according to what memory comes in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And fractures of the bone are known by this that the joint is twisted and wide open at the end, and it is pressed by the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when it [the dislocation] has no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no breakage.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may have twisting, a fracture, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand at all, but place medicine on it that comes afterwards, and then hold it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breaks that occur at an angle and are the two separated parts, they must now be made equal again, so that abscesses do not come in.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses become hot, let him leave them for some days, until the abscesses are appeased.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then make it equal to the mouse that you can easily and skillfully catch, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of one where there are broken bones; then hold it, as is explained hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bones are broken into pieces, divide it into two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the member are disjointed, reset them with all means the additions in their places as you can, and ensure that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And align well the two bones correctly according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that they are not correctly aligned: straighten them nicely, and do not strain or press too much as those who force it out by their work produce abscesses and contractions in the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are set, carefully immobilize the patient so that he does not move, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For if he feels no pain, it is not set correctly, and it must be placed in such a position that he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And be aware that it should be put rightly so that deformities do not come when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the qualities of the broken member are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as fingers, thumbs, and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in fine linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and stiff linen, for the broad linen binds the entire large member, and restrains it evenly on all sides, so there is no swelling.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then, tie light bandages around it three or four times according to the member, and hold your hand slightly on the entire length, then go above the fracture and hold it less, than the fracture, then move away from the fracture a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament, and wind it directly over the broken place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place dampened linen or cloth strips between the joints until they are all equal, then tie it all together with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is a swelling or abscess, place something soothing for the abscess that is hot and what removes the swelling on top, and leave it in this way for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then fasten your splints, and they should be half the width of a thick stick that is carefully sawed, or a rope from which they make ropes for ships, and they should be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the splint that a man places over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And should also be as long as necessary for the member, whether large or small.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then bind the splint in the same way you did at the first joint, then sew it on using thread as done at the first fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The bandage should be closer in this location, rather less so; and it is necessary that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	If the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who make their rope from twisted linen, it is a great error, because the twist cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pierced by the limbs of the ribs after setting them in healthy bones, place linen or flax padding beneath them to prevent swelling.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is broken and the nerves are torn, I will tell the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to hold bones of broken members all day long on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For large members, there should not be splints placed except after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of abscess healing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: it is that you take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, on [the affected area], and this is the common method for restoring a fracture using plasters, and this is also suitable for women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for healing breaks, dislocations and twists: take albaries, lupine, elm, asafetida and Arabic gum, mix in ten parts; add myrrh and aloes, five parts; seven parts of alkali; then make a powder and mix with yolk of an egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition and quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, mix in ten parts; add myrrh and aloes, eight parts; six parts of acacia; Armenian pitch ten parts; grind well, and mix with vinegar or yolk of an egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of plaster for dislocated joints and swollen bones, and to relieve the pain, they use the bone saw and break it: take new linen, wet in vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on the place. This plaster does not heal but is good for soothing hot abscesses and proper bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of setting broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth wormwood, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of poultice to heal broken bones and to hasten the healing of an abscess. Take equal parts of mallow root, chamomile, viola flowers, beeswax flour, and grind them together; mix with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, mix with moist coriander water or vinegar, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another stronger method of poultice when the hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take equal parts of mallow root, flax seed, blackthorn, clover, and sassafras; also viola flowers and chamomile flowers; grind them together, and mix with either salt water, sweet water or vinegar, according to the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance besides a mixture of beeswax and oil should be applied to a broken limb for restoration, and it should neither be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen states that for restoring a broken limb, one should apply warm dry substances such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of application that is useful for wounds and pain: take mugath (possibly a type of plant) and chopped human hair or feathers of birds, and vis amalgam (a substance used in medicine), grind them all together to make a poultice and apply it to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then, dislocate a little after that, and be careful that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not dislocate it by hand for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	If pain, itchiness, lack of rest or swelling occurs at the joint, hasten and dislocate it, and remove the plaster immediately; take a light cloth, sea sponge dampened with water, and immerse in water; lift the joint until the itchiness stops, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen dampened with water or rose oil on it, and tie it up with a nut until you are sure that the abscess is warm.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and remove the pain, then begin the suturing subtly, and a little plaster, and not to strain it too much as before; and suture until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess has burst, become red, painful and swollen, and if you need plaster and linen, then suture it as you did before evenly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	If nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not remove it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the abscess breaks and the incision approaches the skin.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then hold it more tightly than before, and make the flesh thicker, as I said earlier; and if you see the joint drying out more than necessary, know that nutrients cannot enter.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then apply hot moist heat every time you reset it, and for each three hours, loosen the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work, then cut the nutrients from the limb, and hasten to correct those who leave the limb twisted: it is harmful, and it is a work of fear; I do not see anything else than labor and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	diverse methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	many ways of fractures are, and various shapes, and the causes are determined.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because there are fractures made by sword strike, and the shaft breaks the entire bone up to the splinter that is under the bone, as when hached or fisted; therefore this type of fracture is called "hachuring".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	or the sword strikes the bone from above by piercing it and this type of fracture is called "complete"; and the wound caused by these two fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a bruise filled with blood, or a wound or arrow wounds, or falling upon a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If it is a swelling that approaches the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on the bone and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is an injury that has penetrated the bone as fine as a hair and it is a small wound, which is called this swelling "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or something similar causes the bone piece to enter within [the wound], and the joints are compressed like the blacksmith does when he hammers on cauldrons; if an arrow enters it.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	This happens more often in those who have moist bones, such as a child's head bone;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And these types of breaks have small fragments dislodged, as I will speak in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all manners of breaks by the drawing on them, and the testing inquiry, and through the corruption of flesh that is above. (line-by-line translation)
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of the capillary is known by those who, when the bone is exposed and scraped above, if the break appears black. (line-by-line translation)
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, take care of the patient's circumstances, and if you see any bad accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever, the hairs coming out and reddening, and other symptoms in various dispositions, it cannot heal with doubt. (line-by-line translation)
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an overwhelming accident, and you hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the splinter first comes to you in winter, it must be removed before the fourteenth day at the bone's mouth.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and the accidents we have mentioned come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	If the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary to make a cut in the affected area as follows: and take hold of the head of the splintered bone, and remove the covering from the bone on all sides, and above the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if blood flows to reveal the bone or abscess boils, assist with what is needed and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the abscess boils subside, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is called the cutting method.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then insert another, larger incision.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various sizes of blades, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made of iron not copper; and work lightly so as not to pierce the flesh.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and projecting, it is necessary that you pierce around it so that you provide blades with grooves, not sharp enough to penetrate beyond the bone surface, and above the point there should be a margin or circle that prevents the point from passing beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, each coming in its place at the depth of the bone, so that you have grooved blades for all cases; and this is the form of the four types of grooved blades:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one grooved blade on the bone and turn it with your hand until you feel the bone is pierced; then move the blade to another part a little afterward, and do this all around; then cut the space of the bone between the periosteum, and do this as delicately as possible, lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone or any of the tools you have, such as pliers or forceps; and make sure you do not touch the cerebral membrane or the dura mater.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the tightness that has remained on the bone or another similar instrument resembling an incisor, but it should be thinner and more delicate than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	If something remains of the small bones or scales, remove them gently with one instrument; then treat the wound with what we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of work, which is more secretive, is the one that the Greeks call it, and they highly praise it, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture moves open; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place it under the head of this concave incisor, as shown in the following figure:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side only, and the parts are concave on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you cut lightly around the bone, but take care of the cloth that is underneath:
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is adhered to the bone, remove it gently, for it is removed badly with harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is only split from above, and there are small fragments, then after smoothing it, remove the scales with a sharp rasp, having different amounts as necessary, in order to provide the most suitable amount for each place, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Start with a large rasp, then proceed with finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like or subtle fractures, you must provide a treatment according to its nature; and this is not something that can be answered by one who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is open, you should take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil and place it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 3 layers, wet it in wine and rose oil, place it on the first cloth; do this as lightly as you can, so as not to burden the wound, then administer another string but do not tighten it more than it just covers the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it for 1 day or 2, until the abscess subsides, then remove the string, and provide medicine such as marshmallow root, oats, incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and provide reliable medicines without bitterness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And keep the wound always clean, do not leave any dressing or let it be covered with bandages, for when bandages are placed on the scalp, they rot and cause infection, which brings great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed upon it, it will bite through.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Then take care, if any harmful event befalls the patient as we have said, it is full of doubtful meaning.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if there comes blackness not for any reason other than the medicine that has been applied to it, which may have such power, you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them with one piece of linen cloth and apply it upon it.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care of methods of treatments, as it is necessary, while he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or only one of them, since they are two bones, but the one below is cartilage and does not break, unless it causes a swelling or deformation, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger or thumb into the nose and align the fracture inside the nostril index, and at the pocket by exhalation, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain due to your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part near the neck and the thumb cannot reach its place, you must align it with the head of a ruler, a little bigger.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	If it is broken in two parts, then do as before, and hasten to restore the first day if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has cooled down, then tie a linen cloth to the neck if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you step on another person or are stepped upon, it breaks [the bone] and the tendons become as thick as they fill the nostrils with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said some remedy that one should moisten the tendons in butter and boil them each day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a concoction of egg white and milled flour; then leave the tendon until the bone is hard, and the cartilages have hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one steps on feathers of goose in place of tendons, and if it is wrapped with a piece of linen, and holds the breakage, and blows warm air [into it]; then do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the new (opening) while you are working on it, put either beeswax or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a small piece of lignum aloes, there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come to it (the new opening), apply plaster from without, with flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with egg yolk, then put on light bandages, but do not tie the new opening too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the new opening is small and it breaks into small pieces, then remove with suitable instruments, then close the wound, and treat with things that promote healing such as plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound within the nose, treat it with cautery and insert sticks of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the break is only displaced and not broken through to the inside, but rather bent within, this can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should put your index finger in the patient's mouth; if it is on the left side, you should put your index finger of the right hand and push gently into the break, then use the other hand to adjust it from the outside and align it.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, then you must administer extension of two parts, equal in size.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If the teeth move or are broken, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a splint on the fractured jaw and put a double cloth over it; put a large and well-made cradle or piece of leather equal to the jaw lengthwise and crosswise, and secure it as you can, and command the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see the figure change, dislocate it on the third day and then reset it to its original position; put a poultice on top made with flour or wheat with egg, after removing the splint; put a light linen bandage over the poultice and if the dislocation reoccurs, leave it as long as it is healed; many times it heals in four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, bring what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is breakage and wound together, take care that no piece of the bone is removed; use the tools suitable for that purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, you should widen it with fire as necessary.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, close the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for that purpose, to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	From the lock (or fastening)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The lock (or fastening) breaks many times in front of the shoulder, and the breakage is in four ways: or it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so one grips the shoulder where the lock feels broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then put the break in equal alignment with your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and has no appearance or bulging.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, put a round cushion of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and let it be thick according to your necessity; stretch and lift the lock, and hold the cushion with your hand, so that you align the break as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of the joint because it comes in completely, then the patient must lie on their affected side, and a small pillow should be placed under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the socket is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find broken bones, then it is necessary that you cut across them; and pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any obstruction, strike it at one of the incisions you made; but place this instrument under the socket to keep it open.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and resemble a spoon, not concave, and be as large as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the shape of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are certain of the abscess's heating, if it opens a wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt about the abscess's heating, then use linen and gauze to cover the wound, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	If abscess heating comes, wet linen in rose oil and asafoetida and vinegar, then place on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The bone's compression when it feels wounds and cuts is to put the plaster of milled powder and egg yolk on the bone, place light straws on top, and place a spear underneath if needed.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very long bandage of a palm's width, then put one double cloth damp on top, and roll it up; then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the edge of the bandage hangs over.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the chin, and under the patient's chin; and tighten it from each side, and when you see that the fracture aligns properly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then reinforce it daily, and when the swelling subsides, hold it in place.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under his chin to lift the shoulder up; align the fracture by moving the shoulder with force or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except for bad accidents occur, until 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then, if necessary, begin the treatment and hold it steady, and leave it in this state until it is restored; and it is usually restored within 28 days, and sometimes sooner for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is dislocated or broken out of its socket and not moving, it should only be moved by touch; if the injury is apparent, align it according to the nature of the break, and reset it in all ways possible; then put powder from a mill with egg whites and light feathers on it, and cover it with two layers of cloth; then place a large and thin cushion over it, about one finger's width larger than the shoulder, and make sure the cushion is evenly spread under every part of the shoulder, so that the feathers fill the gap between the cushion and the shoulder equally; and then bind it tightly with a great bandage to prevent the cushion from moving from its place, and observe the patient daily; whenever the pain subsides, reset the shoulder if necessary, and keep the feathers evenly placed on the cushion; lay the patient on his side; and the shoulder will be restored within 20 or 30 days. And when this number is reached, unbind it, and be careful because it is not bone that becomes loose easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not below the skin, lift it up, remove the bone, and do as we have said in the fracture of the fistula to treat an abscess by heating.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the fistula
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The piece is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks off at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks down below, causing the patient great pain, and without a splint, and quickly, and possibly vomiting blood, and the channels open in the broken bone, and he feels everything very badly.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back with their head down, and one cushion is placed between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed and the ribs are brought together to your hands, and it must be done carefully so that the bone figure is as required; then salt poultice and bandages are put on top of the broken bone, or a light cloth, and it is wrapped in one cloth, and it is tied to the broken bone so that it does not move; and you turn the limb roundabout, and tighten it gradually, and check each hour if it heals, and if it softens, tighten again; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or inflammation at the location, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and dislocate it, remove the poultice, and address those who came with ways of treatment; then reattach the poultice, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of a broken rib
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large ones behind the back and in the chest, and they do not break easily except due to moisture; and it is well felt at the inquiry with the fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restorations are such that you must set the break evenly, as required. Then place the splint, and apply a steady pressure if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break in the ribs is sinking inside, the patient feels intense pain and shortness of breath, similar to pleurisy, for the bone punctures the lining; and the edges are sharp, and immediately he vomits a large amount of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the break outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot poultices come, unless they have arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have arrived, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that someone should put leeches on the wound to drain pus, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the leech does not attract excess fluid to the wound due to its weak constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that someone should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put bandages between the ribs to even out the swelling around it; then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which does not pierce the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, it is necessary to cut above the broken rib, and it is necessary to put one instrument underneath for support; then you must saw the bone, pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on it, and put it there; and heal the rib while it is necessary to do so, and lie down with it resting where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the bones in the neck break and do not bend; and similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, take notice if their hands are softened, swollen and dead, and cannot be moved or stretched, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel nothing. Know that they are mortally wounded in many positions, but if they do not move and feel when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when this happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it will be healed or not, take notice if the feet are softened, and if there is a swelling that is in the hands, and the back suddenly jumps with spasm and discharge involuntarily; and when it is pressed on the belly, it jumps involuntarily. And when it is pressed on the back and he wishes to straighten himself, he cannot. Know that it is mortally wounded: do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this incident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you anoint [the abscess] with rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and let them not sleep on the part where they feel pain, until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone is dislocated, it should be covered [with something]; then remove the bone, join the two edges of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat the wound with healing salve until it heals; and if the head of the bone (which is called "the heads of the cow") is broken, take your left hand, put it on the dislocated part and hold it equal to your right hand, then apply the plaster and the linen bandage, if you have them; then tighten [the bandage], and if there are bones protruding, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ankle bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It often happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there is only a little lessening of the pain at the site; and it extends along the length, bends towards the crotch, causes pain and swelling at the site that breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the healing is that you extend your hand above [the break], so that you are over the break; and recognize where the break is and what its shape is; and if the break is only at the top, then set the break equal to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along the length or it bends inward, make the patient lie on his stomach so that the healing of the break comes to your attention.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it (the dislocation) right, put an armature on it, then put a splint of wood or horn over it and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the lever below the ribs until the patient is comfortable.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess comes to the surface, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down, and place what we have previously mentioned on it; then return to treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad occurrence; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is the part that is between the neck and the arm, and if it is fractured, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: of which one is that you take a rod filled with coarse material, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends of the rod to each other and raise them up, and place the patient on one seat; then drop the broken arm onto the rod, until it reaches the level, and have a hump in the rod, then raise something heavy above it or the assistants extend it downwards; then place the hands of the molder on the fracture equally, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that you lay the patient on his bed, tie one end of the rod to his neck and command two assistants that one holds the part above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds both ends of the rod, each pulling in their respective directions.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then hold one ligament beneath the break, and above the break, and extend each of the assistants to their part. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must put a moderate ligament beneath the joint, and another towards the flesh, beneath the break; and in the same way if the break is towards the flesh, you must put a light ligament without labor, until the break is equal on the joint, and on the flesh; then make it equal, as necessary, and hold it, unless an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess does come, do not hold it for more than seven days, and put a soft cloth in oil of roses on it to soothe the abscess; then hold it, and the method of holding it is that you place the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and put the towel, and hold it onto the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in its correct position, unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone is moving, use wedges, and put a larger and stronger wedge on the break than the others, and have one space between each wedge, and let each wedge be so large that it passes the break two fingers width from each side; then hold onto the wedges, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, with more force but less in pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the abscess of the arrowhead, and the constriction, as we have said, during the time that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is cold, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every third day at the suture, to see if pus does not swell or appear at the site, or the inflammation does not come to the limb because it is too narrow. If this happens, proceed as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	If such accidents do not occur, the arrow should not be removed before three or more days, and the patient should lie on their back with their hands on their stomach; and place an equal linen cushion under the arrowhead and watch every hour of the day or night that the limb does not move or the suture is not loose; proceed by the power of medicine and give the food as we have previously stated, so that the food is initially fine; when it starts to recover, let it be coarse. It is customary for the arrow and the thigh to be re-inserted within forty days; then remove and administer baths and ointments for the wound to heal. If the constriction is ugly and swollen, wait longer to remove it, up to one month.
de la brisure du bras	on the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of two bones, which are called the "two shafts"; one is small, and it is the one that forms the elbow; the other is large, and it is the one below, near the little finger; sometimes only the large shaft breaks, or sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small shaft breaks, the restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one breaks, healing is poor and more difficult than when both break together. If it's only the small shaft that breaks, you should slightly extend it gently and straighten it.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large shaft that breaks, you should apply more force; extend it up to one cubit, lift the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller finger lower than the others, cross the patient over himself, and place a cubit above him, so that the patient does not feel any discomfort; then stretch out the ministers' arms below their hand, or to the elbow, and have one minister on one side and another on the other above. Then align the broken bone according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If with the break at the joint, I have spoken of it in the individual chapter; then take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	If in the beginning of the setting it occurs that abscesses appear, apply one linen cloth made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and lay one cloth carefully over the abscesses, so that they are pacified. Then remove the wax, and place a plaster with milled powder and egg white; then put in sticks (splints), and make the stick of the breakage stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have 7 splints or more in various positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two; and hold the breakage more at the top, and less on the sides, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are over the breakage be soft and moist, not too hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is tied, be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And examine the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accidents occur in the member, such as itching that occurs in the member, then you must irrigate the member with hot water until the itching is relieved; and let the member not rest. Then repeat the treatment, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, or similar things, give the advice accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the urine cannot reach the member due to it being too narrow, then you must soften it with oil for a few days, until the urine passes through, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things mentioned above occur in the patient, then do not release him until 20 days or more. Inquire about his hands to his neck, and make sure his neck is even, and watch for movement and tilting, and let him sleep on his back; know that this break will be healed in 30 or 40 days, or perhaps in 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	For at the back of the hand and the fingers, there are few fractures, but it occurs repeatedly many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or dislocated, the patient should lie flat on his back, with arms straight and evenly aligned; then he places his hand on a stretched cloth, and the attendant extends the broken bones and aligns them as much as possible; then apply plaster and compresses, if abscess does not occur; then apply a splint according to the severity of the fracture; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the side of the sole near the abdomen, make a splint from cloths, and instruct the patient to press his injured hand against it; then bind it with a long piece of cloth, and the splint should be as large as the palm of the hand, and tightened as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the edge, you must place a splint above and another beneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand and stop the flow of blood between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the break comes on any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, equalize it as necessary; hold it with the sole and, if you see that it is displaced, place a straight splint to lift the break and immobilize it; if the break is in the other fingers (such as the index or another), equalize them and tie them with the healthy finger that follows; tie all of them in one binding, which is enough, or place a splint, such as a thumb-splint; take care in restoring and positioning the abscess, and apply heat to it as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the leg are often broken, and one sees it when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one ties a ligament above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patients lie on their face, then each attendant extends their ligament equally to its part; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If the break is near the root of the leg, one ligament should be towards the heel and the others towards the break. And similarly, if it is near the knee, then extend the ligaments on the outside of the knee, and the extension below; then place the bones equally in their two hands, as they are by nature, and then apply the splint, and bind it, without an abscess coming.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that heats up, let it cool down first, then return to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must bind over the fracture. That is to say, bind a strong bandage of doubled linen and let the superfluous parts protrude, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg, under the knee, and bring the end of the thread to the top; then turn both the leg and the thigh over the bandage, then put two bars on the break, and put a bar on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth between the leg and the thigh to equalize the binding, then start tying four twists or six on the fracture; and as you go higher on the fracture, loosen it; then hold the two threads that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, bind three bars on top, then return to the bottom of the thread until you come across the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as it is, and let there be no sign of abscess or swelling nor anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is a break, straighten it as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they must be cut off if possible; and if it cannot be done, the limb must be broken and the bone removed; and cure it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken so that it can be splinted like in the shoulder or arm; however, in this kind of restoration, the patient does not feel pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored within a few days, either less or more, according to the various complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the street of the knee, there is little fracture, but it often bends. And if it breaks, it is not a complete break, only a crack or a fissure, and it causes pain everywhere and without a specific location, and this is felt very much.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one equalizes the bone that is broken at its ends, as long as it can be assembled; then put the splint, and place a round peg there if needed, and tighten it as required, then recheck all the arrangements mentioned in other breaks, such as an abscess, boil or similar; for each accident, use what is required until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "shin" and the others are called "fibula"; and it has all the same breakages as in the arm, and therefore the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is entirely the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; and it turns underneath. Then bring extension, make it even, and tie the edges equally; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fists full of splints that support the leg on both sides and are as long as the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them at this point, and the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should provide a splint as long as the leg, and it should be of wood, and they place the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly make this in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any abscess or other accident; and cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but there may be fracture of the bones in the foot and toes, and it has no cure except for compression in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones in the foot, and you see these bones protruding one above the other, place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wants to walk, then place your foot under his, where the bones are raised, and press them back into their places; then apply the splint and padding, and put a small table under the foot with two flat surfaces, then tighten it around the foot in the appropriate way; once you have wrapped the cloths around it, and other things that you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, remove the splint, because you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two [bones] are broken, restore them as we have said in the hand bones; then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and it should be slightly larger; then place a wooden block beneath the fractured one, as I have said, and hold it aligned; and if there are two or more, or more, break each bone separately, place a splint over each one according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the wooden block under the fracture; and ensure that the head of the block is facing the abdomen of the limb, so it covers it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and treat each accident as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the womb is broken by natural childbirth, make her sit with her legs apart, then lean her towards the part of the back and hold her from behind; then fill the cavity of nature with cotton and also put as much as a stone in it; then turn the woman, lift up her buttocks little by little, and the cotton will burst out to the entrance of the nature, and the bone will return with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of straw, tie one end of a cord to it, and push the whole bladder into the nature; then blow forcefully into the cord until the bladder is inflated inside: the fracture will return; then fill with cotton and leave it for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the arm is broken in man or woman, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures should not be concealed from him who puts his study and practice to them and attends my book. For the fracture indicates in many ways the right way of restoration: take note of that then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and insert the penis; then wrap it in cloth and leave it for 3 days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	with break (or fracture) and wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For that person who has a fracture with a wound (or break with wound), especially if it is large as the leg bone or shoulder blade or similar, it should be cauterized now, as the cauteries that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, it should be sealed with vitriol (a disinfectant), if you have no other option, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess bursts, allow the healing to continue until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased; do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks open in the hollow of the cavity, you must set it gently and slightly extend it.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not aligned for you to set it evenly in your hands, you will need this tool made of iron that has 7 or 8 inches long and its width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror that he holds .3 or 4, depending on what is needed in each cure of breaking bones; and it should be round and slightly larger than a coin so it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and sharp before, and thick from the middle to the tip, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because the crooked neck should be placed on top of the obvious bone; push it once until it returns, and make it even on both sides. If the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must cut the apparent bone, so that the instruments have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you cannot return the bone as we have said, if you have an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, use it to your power; then gnaw that which is left in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Do as much as you can to get it in its place, then moisten one linen cloth in black stiptic wine, or if it's in summer, moisten the cloth in water; do not put any oil-soaked cloth or anything over the wound that could cause corruption and putrefaction; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times have foolish surgeons done this, causing death or corruption of the patient sometimes; and let the bandages be softer and more pliable than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad incident will come about, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, do not put splints on it; but wrap around instead, in place of splints, hard bandages and bind them. And when after one day or two you see pus boiling at the wound, remove completely what you had placed on top, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be prepared in such a way that the splints slide downwards gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they pass many days without healing and continue to swell again, know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must carefully open the wound and remove all the dislocated fragments causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If a fistula or corruption comes to the place, you must treat it according to what is said in the chapter before this one. And when the bone is broken and opened above the limb, such as the bone of the shin or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not draw it out; for many times death may come, but leave it until it can heal by itself; perhaps a charrion cart will be needed after twenty or thirty days. Then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	broken bones that come on the suture (joint)
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after health following the break, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a pitiful sight to see the shape of the limb; and unfortunately, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take good care of it afterwards: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saracocola, acacia, and similar others, taking any one of these substances or all together and boil them in a stiptic wine or with an abundance of egg or with oil; then place the mixture in a bandage and apply pressure and do not remove it for many days; then dislocate it, and start another, until the nodulation is removed; or you hold above a piece of wood well made; for the properties of wood are that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, chop it off, and make the excess apparent; or you shave it at any razor until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb that is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is set and remains afterwards, the limbs become weak and delicate; this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or due to excessive swelling; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body strong, until the flesh multiplies in him; then provide baths, and give him joy and rest; next apply salve to the member, so that the salve attracts great nutrients, and often apply cold water to it, until the nutrients reach the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the limb anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and this practice is condemned, and it causes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the knots and tortures are fresh, they must be softened with hot water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, root radishes, sweet clovers, and similar things; and you should make a soothing plaster using dyaquilon well-made, and take musk from vismalve, mix it with gelyn grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster; or you can take greased figs, grind them with corn bran, and similar medicines that alleviate pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the knots are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. Movement should be introduced to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortures are hardened and strengthened like stone, requiring surgery, it must be covered up to the bone, at the subtle incision; and cotton and wool should be placed in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be repositioned with care.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if it is delayed, the limb swells, and in case it is placed back at its joint; therefore, it should not be moved before it is swollen: many times this causes pus and other pain.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Throughout, when this happens, you sanitize the patient, then let him be, until all abscesses are appeased; then moisten the limb with hot water and oil, then gently move it, and care for each member as care comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
des mandibules	of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	1. Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous: It happens that the jaws are dislocated in two ways: either they are partly dislocated from their place and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards down, causing saliva to flow from the mouth which it cannot hold, and it cannot close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can return in various positions more often.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and finished, you must reset it quickly, without hesitation;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a manner that the minister holds the patient's head and pushes the thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other hand should be open, to make it even; and instruct the patient to soften and move their jaws from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And bring the thumb equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is difficult, similarly, if it is both jaws together, apply hot water and oil to loosen them gently; do not rush to forcefully move, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they (dislocations) are set back in place equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed well, cover it with a cloth moistened with rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with several strips.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his arms be placed between two pillows, so that it does not move to the right or left, nor force itself at all, but take light meat, until the pain is gone, and the jaws are tied.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat lightly whatever he wants, and not to work at all in opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well tied and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be reset in an hour and are not returned to their place, fever and usual sweats occur, and perhaps abdominal swelling, and possibly vomiting bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	When you see this, therefore, know that it is disaster; and many times the one in whom it occurs dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the collarbone   (metaphorical usage, meaning "neck" or "throat")
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The splint cannot dislocate from the side within the ribcage and is dislocated outside once at the hip, and it is felt clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint with your palm and it will return; then put a splint and bandage over it and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is toward the back cannot dislocate; if it does, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put a splint and bandage over it and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And likewise, bring back the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in four ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the part near the shoulder joint below; and the second way is to the part of the buttock; and by chance it may dislocate above, but this rarely happens.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And never dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and never dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocate downwards towards the axilla, especially in those who have little flesh, for it leaps out quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it leaps out slightly, and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	Sometimes happens to some men percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must verify it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when they move downwards towards the shoulder, and you should distinguish between a diseased shoulder and a healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	You will find a hollow in the shoulder blade and beneath the shoulder to the touch of the shoulder head, just as there is an eye socket; and the patient cannot return their hand to its place, nor make any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And if it is dislocated upwards, it will not be hidden, for you can feel it clearly by touching.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this method of dislocation is not always easy to reset, when it is new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The minister lifts the patient's hand high, then puts your fist underneath it, and pulls the joint up forcefully to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it high, then puts it underneath; quickly it will come back.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said within a few hours, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and they should be given a soothing and calming balm, such as a decoction of elderflower and fenugreek in water, and it should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should lie down on their back and place a piece of even linen under the affected shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then the healer places his foot on the cloth and gently lifts the head of the shoulder, pulling the arm of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another assistant holds the head of the patient still below it; that shoulder will return immediately. If you see it dislocate again in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and have one man who is larger than the patient be present. He should be positioned straight alongside the cost side, and push the shoulder of the patient down under his own, lifting the affected shoulder upward so that the patient hangs in an "A" shape.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And another minister pulls the hand of the patient towards the abdomen. If the patient is too weak, he can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is also pulled in another way: and that one drives a long needle into the ground so that the head is as round as a pea, but neither too large nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft wool beneath, and the patient should be lying along the length of the bed; then his hand on the affected side should be extended towards the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, perform this treatment: take one stick of two hands in length and four fingers in width, which has its head round for easy insertion deep inside the anus, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie the head of the stick with cloth to prevent the patient from being scalded, then insert the stick into the anus of the patient; extend one arm along the stick, and bind the shoulder to the stick, and the forearm at the end of the hand, then place one leg on one side of a bench, and let the other side hang loose; the dislocation will be reduced immediately.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is inside, no matter how, you must put a sphere of cotton equal in size under the anus, then place a plaster filled with powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, all over the shoulder and around; then hold it down beneath the anus, turn the string around the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eat little food, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is hardened and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come or for another reason, then you must administer three cauterizations as stated in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you have done all of this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve to the shoulder is cut or stretched out or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the hip and limbs, front or back, is caused by force and extension of hands, and other means are administered for its treatment; it should be cured until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing, if there is still pain in the limb and slow movement, the patient should use baths several times until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost   (This line seems incomplete, as it does not seem to follow the pattern of translation from the previous lines.)
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the arm is dislocated at points, and it comes back at points; and if it becomes dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired because it can be seen clearly and felt clearly; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick arm with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset the dislocation in such a way that the abscesses come out easily, for if the abscess comes out, it would be difficult to set; and perhaps it cannot be set completely from all sides, especially when it is at the back; it is worth more than other dislocations, and it causes greater pain, and perhaps death follows.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows, when it can be returned to its state, extend your hand to both of his hands; and stretch out his arms, and place his hands opposite each other according to the bone joints outside and inside, and push the joint back to its sockets or to the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when you fold your hand over your other hand, and push against the bone joint that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is necessary for two people to extend the arm, and one person should hold it still during the extension; then turn the arm from both sides, and when you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the master joins the joint to his hand, he applies some oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint back into place until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, he puts on a plaster made with egg white and applies pressure to form it, then straps the arm around the patient's neck for several days, then unstraps it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is held in place, you unbind it and leave it. If you see that the joint is not holding well, you repeat the plaster and binding, and leave it like that for some days until it is firmly set; then you unbind it again.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels pain after the repositioning of the joint, and it becomes motionless, then bathe it well and rub it, and press until it is soothed; or you place a sheep's grease nail on the jointure, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when it swells, rub the jointure gently, then place the nail back on, and then enter into the bath; and do so two or three times, until it is healed; and if you see, place warm dampened wool with butter on it, and strap it; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand joint, and its reset is easy, more than other jointures, nonetheless it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour when it is dislocated, before the joint is swollen or there comes an abscess hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the repositioning is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and mirror the hand so it aligns, with its palm above the appearance of the jointure, and push it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Furthermore, you must watch to see if it is in its place; then make the patient lay the back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, the patient should place the back of their hand on the table, and the one who is helping should place their hand above the affected joint area. If it returns to its place now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	And if not, strain with plasters or soothing poultices the abscesses and let them remain in place to start healing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	If it cannot tolerate that, and you cannot put it back in place after any days, the dislocated joint will remain displaced.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And it is not advisable for the patient to be forced to move his hand until the hand is healed, and cannot grasp anything entirely: therefore know that the nerves are severed or the arteries; there is no other remedy but to force by fire cautery in this case, and by chance, nothing else has value.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, put a splint on it as we have said, then bind and leave for 5 days, then unbind and leave in this manner.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well and there is no pain, moist with warm water and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers on the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers on the hand are sometimes dislocated on one side or the other, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm itself;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then push the finger back into its place, and hold the head of the finger while you bend it toward the part where it is dislocated;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and leave it for two days, and then make it straight on the third day; bind it tightly, as we have said, and loosen it by a day, and move it, and tie it again; do this often until it is straight;
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And similarly (do) the same, if it is dislocated from the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and similarly do when it is dislocated from another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	And for the dislocation of the small of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the small of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many such dislocations without a cure, death quickly approaches the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excretions jump involuntarily, and they cannot be held; many times, any member is softened, either both legs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the spine is affected in four parts; that which affects the rear part is called "gibbosities":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The cure is that you check if the gibbosities have come from childhood; if there is no treatment or healing from it entirely.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the ancient ways of cure used to speak in great words, but it is not profitable in all cases.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the case of the illness that precedes, there is no remedy nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and similarly that which comes straight in two sides, can only be cured by the one coming from behind, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient should be extended on an even surface, and have restraint beneath him, so he does not bleed.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then insert one poker into the head on the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a cord under the patient's buttocks, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two ministers know the cords, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two pokers.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And let them be tightly closed, the torches as we have said, and the hands place their palms on the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a table 3 feet long and rounded on the top, and place the patient on their side. Then push the edge of the table underneath the opening and place the middle part of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And the attendant places their feet on the other end of the table and presses hard until it returns to its place; if you see that it does not return, you do it with the tournet that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you insert two needles into the patient's head from one arm and two others in the feet, and there should be a palm's space between each needle.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and there should be one suture in each needle, or turn the needle, and the needles should be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between two needles there should be one moving needle, as with a thread, and in two moving needles there should be two small needles of a palm's length for turning the needle.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the thread that is among the needles to the needle in the head, and the other thread to the needle at the feet, and each of the ministers turns the needle along the whole length, and the master sets the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equalized (the dislocated joint), place a dry plaster with egg white on top, then press and then apply an iron rod of three feet long, which penetrates the swelling and the healthy part of the vertebrae, then tie it with a cord as we have said, and use gentle massage until it is healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the rod as we have said before; and sometimes they administer a piece of wood.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine, and it is thought to be dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, so one should not have presumption: by chance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the shoulder and the arm joints come out of place only by dislocations themselves, not otherwise as with other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four ways: inside and outside, front and back; and more on the inside than elsewhere, and less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer, and the injured knee joint is wider than the healthy, and the injured person cannot bend their knee in fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the loin that is dislocated inflamed with abscess, because the knee joint comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that one who suffers from this condition is that this event happens contrary to what was mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that one whose leg is swollen as mentioned before, are that it is not doubled in the knee, and does not feel pain when bent, and if you wish to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and holds back its urine, and the ankle inflates, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that one whose condition is at the back, are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it double, and this leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle becomes softened, and the head of the thighbone is beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The re-alignments of this similarity of dislocation are such that you should observe if the dislocations are old and remain in their position without any treatment; and it is not appropriate for there to be any assumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	For one whose dislocation is recent, and there are four types of dislocation, you should hurry that you turn the joint, push it inward and outward, and move it left and right; by chance if it returns, no further treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare one strong attendant and hold the leg firmly with two hands or tie one rope above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another minister extends his hand over it in such a manner that he pushes his hands beneath the buttocks, then tightens a rope-like thing on the thigh; and another grips the head of the thigh with the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they all extend from above and below at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If the shoulder is not dislocated, a cure for its condition should be applied. When the dislocation is at the front, you must hold the patient on their healthy side, then put the rope around the root of the thigh, and the limb that is underneath the angle, then pull the rope upward towards the angle, and towards the shoulder.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another minister and grasp the large limb of the sick thigh and extend it outward in this manner: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the sick leg should be extended two feet more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then it should be hung from a post by the neck, and there should be two long arms below; then command one minister to embrace the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient who will embrace the thigh, as the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is on the outside, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has gout, and draw a string over the diseased leg properly, and also over the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then insert two needles, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one needle between the thighs of the patient in this manner;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And let it be planted with moist cloths around it, so that it does not hurt the patient; then each minister should approach him and place his hand on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that is good. If not, place it on a table and press as we have said in the previous section, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be straightened quickly, as I have said; and place the hand on the opposite side of the injured angle, then press with the other hand and pull towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back (of the body), it should not be extended downward, nor raised up on earth, but rather it should be as when a hunchback is dislocated at the back, as we have said in the laying of two hunchbacks.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it (the affected limb) should be on its face, and the ligament extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed strongly against the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it (the affected limb) will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, place a support (or brace), and bind it with a bandage, so that the hunchback does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And it rests for 3 or 4 days, then dislocate, place a splint on it; and if they are even, hold steady as before, and let them be. For 3 days; then dislocate, and make it move well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation in the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside and out, backward; and never forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his thigh with both hands and pull it back between your hands, then bend the two sides of the thigh into a shape; and another minister extends his foot until the thigh returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends easily at the knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the plaster on top, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly for three or four days, then dislocate it; and let the patient not walk at all until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it heals.
de la dislocation dou talon	about the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the symptoms are that the ankle is swollen, and tenderness in the area where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the relocations are light, and it should be gently extended to the hands when only swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit straight, and hold one minister (assistant) by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then lift it up and push the foot upwards strongly;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this twice as we said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, continue the work, because it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground, and make a firm hole in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around it so that the patient does not bleed;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then anoint the ministers the thigh, and another minister extends the leg at the hands or at one joint, so that it lies across the neck of the leg;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister extends equally, and the passer-by should be close between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while stretching him;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the master puts both hands on the dislocation and another minister anoints the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly;
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, apply the plaster and bandage on top, press firmly, bind the leg to the foot, and watch the nerves that are above the back of the calf, so that the binding is not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it rest for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments soften, hold them tight; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for 4 days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess swells up, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	of the two [shoulders]
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, they must be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any way near the back of the hip, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight up, and place your foot over the affected joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is even and there is no opening, place a two-legged table under the foot, press firmly on it, and leave it for four hours, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When wound comes with the dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times patients die.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	Do not be hasty in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply at the beginning of soothing abscesses warmly, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place, thus allowing the abscess to heal;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the limb is in place, administer remedies to calm the abscess and treat the wound as necessary, using dry poultices.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	If there is a dislocation with a fracture and small bones are displaced, set the bones and perform what has been said for simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And guard against entering into fear, as I have said, for it avails you according to your Creator, and by the skill of your weapon and body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	This is the end of the medical text.
