O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the summary of the science of medicine together with its content, and have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and alien to everyone altogether, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of it beyond the small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been changed by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanities have arisen, intentions are closed, and wisdom is driven away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to want to revive this treatise according to the arrangement of this text in the way of exposition and declaration, and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work along with the adjuncts of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hands can be found in our time, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who is engaged in it should be summoned to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of members, their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving veins and resting ones, and where their issue is located.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Hippocrates said that the nail with the finger is not much, and with work it is little; the same is true in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the beginning of this book, we say to those who are not knowledgeable about the matters previously stated, be careful that you do not err and do not operate on people; thus, I have seen many times more than others who engage in this science and abandon science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess from a woman's neck, and cut her carotid artery; therefore so much blood came out that the woman died in her own hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who pulled an arrow from an old man, and the arrow took with it a piece of his bladder; and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the arrow, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another surgeon who took care of a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break came an injury; and the surgeons, full of ignorance, set the break over the wound with strong force, and did not allow any callus to form on the wound, but left it in that state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated; and it remained thus until the leg became completely swollen and the toes died.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him and hurried to dislocate his leg; and when I dislocated it, he was in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And another mirror that sinks an abscess, and increases its thickness by the evil of its dominion, then sets it on fire.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when it (the abscess) is purged of melancholic humor, it should not be touched by iron unless it is in such a place where all can be removed that is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one where there is danger in various dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Because of this it is necessary that you keep yourself, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you. If you take up arms lightly and firmly, and deal with your patients skillfully, by the grace of God you will come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind diseases that bring great suffering; and put aside weapons that cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen advised in some of his admonitions: "Do not take up care for evil disease lest you be called a foolish healer.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and cold cauteries for ague, and they are arranged from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and iron tools for cautery, and of everything that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blistering and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and these chapters are arranged and have the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from the head to the feet, and have the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid, and the harm, is a long discourse and subtle science and secret responses; and many wise men spoke about it, and agreed with this; but few of them followed their words, for I shall shorten it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it is two complexions: namely hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry constitution, some said that the fire cautery is of great help; while others said the opposite: that the fire cautery has no value for the disease caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; however, those who said the opposite claimed that the fire cautery brings great help to hot and dry diseases in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you understand the body of a man and his moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find that it is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it by experience once.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere except those who have tested it and know by long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and their occurrences and the time interval; other complexions we do not fear, especially in cold and wet diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all mirrors should conform and agree to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son (son is an informal form of address for a young man or boy), that cautery combined with fire is among the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not harm anything except the member that is burned, and does no harm to any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medicines cause diseases in one member to travel to another while moving away, and they bring great sicknesses upon the member; by chance, the fire may kill the patient due to its fierceness and the goodness of its substance, but only if there is excessive use.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this for you by experiment and through the length of my service and the study I have put into the art, and it is in accordance with the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is concealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauterizations should be done, and chose confidants.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, because the harm happening is held back by the aid of cauterization; and similarly, if cauterizations are for necessary pains except when a greater evil cannot come to the member beforehand.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; because a disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say thus; but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are not only medicine that changes the complexion, but also dries up the humors causing pain, and its value exceeds that of other medicines due to its speed and the virtue of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And sometimes the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its properties; and superfluities are collected in it through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as in cauterization for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the "remnants of medicine," but it is true; however, they do not believe that cauterization is worth more than other medicines, but their beliefs are false, and cauterization is called the "remnants of medicine" because when we administer means of treatment in any disease and they are of no value, then we apply cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clearly stated that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not as the foolish interpreters intend.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and the rarity of its substance; and they said that the heat of a cautery does not cause burns, but this is not true for everyone, as I have proven, and found it to be true in some cases; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, just as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you are not sure if it is heated by the color of gold, and at times it may cool down; and if it is overheated, it will ignite the fire; and in this way there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery, which we have found appropriate for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have instructed you this chapter of the head up to the feet, so that the veins may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is beneficial for both moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used in treating a disease called "soda," as well as various fluids that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine clearing the head, three or four times, depending on what the properties and age and accustomance of the sick person can tolerate; and then make them sit backwards over the head of the sick person.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make them sit crosswise between your hands, and place their hands on a pillow; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your thumbs will come, it will bleed. Then heat the cautery called "olivare", as shown in this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make movements and straining your hand up and down repeatedly until you see the bone protruding even slightly; if you do not see the bone, continue to press the cautery as I told you until you can see the bone; then take one scoop of ointment, put it on a piece of soft cotton and place it on the spot, leaving it for three days; after that, place a linen cloth soaked in butter over it; leave it until the heat is gone; afterwards, treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, when an injury remains open for longer, it drains more; and thus, if it heals faster.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	They said that the fire cautery should be left until part of the bone is burned, and then the burnt area of the bone should be reset and healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the fire cautery should be left on top for as long as a wormwood leaf, which women put in their vaginas because the humors come out quickly; and then the wound should be kept open for a long time; after that it should be cured and soothed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good at all to me, except in some men who have fear; and I think I should leave it; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, and from this practice I work in place of salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When there is long-lasting and chronic pain in the head, the sick person should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purge of the head and oils and plasters; and if you do the cautery that we have said before, it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that if the shoulder of the patient is strong and not too cold, then cauterize beneath it a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing the cautery on each horn of the head as we have said before, and perform one cautery or tool called "vasselz"; it is one in which ventouses are placed; hold your hand so that you cannot see to the bone: the patients feel more intense pain in this cauterization than others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used for the middle of the head, and this is the shape [of the cautery tool]:
dou cautere dou chief	The cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments have been performed as I have said in the division of diseases, and none of it helps; then cauteries are made according to two methods, that is, medicine hot and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery by hot medicine is such that you take a small onion, remove the skin and cover one end with two heads, then make the temple where the pain is in such a way that you can replace the onion under the skin; and when it is replaced, press and hold it well and leave it for twelve hours; then unpress and forcefully draw out the onion, leaving the wound so for two or three days; then put cotton dipped in butter on top.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with onion, let it be healed; and if you see that this does not work, then use one of the burning medicines which I have written about or the tenth method for treating burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is performed in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the iron cautery with the shape as shown here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "close" because the top is made in the shape of a claw or has one inch of curvature and the thickness of a little finger; and place it on the painful area, and press the iron slightly but gently, until half of the rod's thickness is burned; and withdraw your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is away from the target, and draw out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Then place cotton in oil and apply it for four days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and afterwards treat the area with ointment until it is healthy; and if you wish to cauterize this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare", at its sharp point, be careful not to touch the artery in this abscess that is not old.
de emigraine	From migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migraine as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you find that cauteries mentioned before in this medicine and iron do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white; and so place it on the side of the jaw line half a finger's length long, and press once with your hand, but do not cover the artery or reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and let nerves have no sight except for the moving one and spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear and especially in those who are not acquainted with it, and unstudied; leave the operation in midway; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you find that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient suffers, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery mentioned or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear occurs due to coldness and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied to it but the pain does not subside, then warm this cautery called "poins" which is its shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing the entire sick ear, or around the two places where the pain remains in both of them, move slightly away from the root of the ear since you have marked the place; and have 10 points around each ear; after healing the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	The torture of the mouth [in Old French] translates to "the torturing of the mouth" [in Modern English].
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that should be cured by cautery is only found in those that move due to flux (flow or discharge), as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and not to perform cauterization on similar cases that come from exudation (secretion) and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When curing this type of torture that moves due to flux of eyes and spurging of head and gargarism (gargling), it is not worth it, so you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little farther from the temple, and the third in the angle of the two lips; place the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make it cauterize towards the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until its middle is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the surgeon's tool that we have mentioned is similar, but it is slightly more subtle and the knife should be a bit larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, take care to ensure it is healed before proceeding.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, the patient does not have fever, then perform four cauteries: two on top of the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one in the vein that is called "vas" as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; cure it as we have said before.
de litargie	The liturgy (de litargie) refers to a set of religious services performed according to the prescribed order of prayers, readings from sacred texts, hymns, and other ritual acts in Christian churches.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this ailment, give the patient large years and round pills made of cerebrum; afterwards, wash the head of the patient entirely, and place the plaster of mustard (sinapi) on the occiput which is written or treated as a plaster; and this is the method of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy like this, it is good; and if not, make four cauterizations on the head from the forehead to the neck, and have a distance of two between each cauterization; and heal it as with others, and if you see it growing worse, apply one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and heal it until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations that are called "olivare" be as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to clean the head (skull) for years and as previously stated; afterwards, clean the patient's head, then perform fire-cauterization on the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck. If more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring it, and the disease is severe, perform four cauterizations on the spine of the back. Leave it to burn until the most painful spot is seared, then withdraw your hand; afterwards, cure it until it is healed, and heal the cauterization called "olivare", as previously stated.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire-cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to clean the brain for years and other treatments as previously stated in the division when the patient is large and enduring pain from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure [the pain], give it gargling and frequent chewing of the brain with good foods; afterwards hold the head still, and make one cautery as I have said before, and one cautery on the swelling, and one on each horn; and if the patient is strong and bearing it, make cauteries as I said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make a subtle cautery like this:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the superfluous matter or corrupt and thick phlegm accumulates, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the excesses are descending towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist due to melancholy, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been stated earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place the linen bandage, well-made like a wheel, around the head of the sick person; cross him and hold him tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment made of old goat's butter; heat the bandage moderately so that it can be pressed on him without causing discomfort; afterwards empty the wheel-like bandage from inside the head, and let it cool; do this to the sick person every week with good management, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you wish to cauterize (someone), make multiple pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This way of cauterizing increases the brain greatly; then place damp cotton wool in butter and linseed oil on top.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes are affected first by the signs I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, command him to lean his head back, and make a cautery under the chin, and apply two cauteries on the temples where the affliction of the eyes is in both or one; and burn all the veins and arteries that are under the eyelid, and let the cautery be long according to the size of the temple; and take care not to allow bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and the incision, how to stop it; and sometimes a cautery or heat is done under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the body
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or from the arteries that appear on the outside of the head; and it is seen that this is superfluous cold fleumatic fluid, then you do the cautery that I said at the beginning of the treatise: one cauterization in the head, and two cauteries above the temples, and two cauteries or cauteries below the eyes; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The tears of the body inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the sick person four cooked eggs to drink; after that, burn the head with oil-based cautery or apply mild oil cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on top of the two sores, a little under the hairline; be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to perform two cauteries on the two witches as long as they are, just like witches are; do not leave the hand unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which points the oil (this line seems to be incomplete or missing something)
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Occasionally, the hairs of the oils are converted to scabs and prick oil, and then a cautery is performed in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your care; afterwards place a figure on the hair similar to the fennel seed, at the beginning of the burn sign; then put cotton soaked in egg glair and musk of parsley on the oil, then heat the cautery to this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn several times, let the coagulated blood appear at that spot; and the signs of the healing of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil; then withdraw your hand, and leave it so for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the cauterization is removed; afterwards cure with ointment until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards hairs grow, and the skin is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same spot as you did before; and if the hairs are curved, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level, and becomes even, and the hairs do not prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaves of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one cubit, and grind them together well; heat it quickly so that it does not cool, then apply onto the parchment as you have made with myrtle leaves, and put on the skin of the patient; if the patient holds only one oil, then it should be worked on in one place, and if in both places; and put cotton dampened with egg white under the oil; and the shoulders of the patient should be clean and you should place your hand showing over the medicine, and press a little pot every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the bite like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the mordication (?) is passed, lift up the bone and turn it so that if you see the paper raised as it was lifted by constriction of fire or incision, and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If this is not the case, set more medicine on the bone or the medicine has not worked yet, as long as your work is even and your eyes placed correctly; then put damp cotton wool in butter until the burns are healed, after healing the ointment called "dyafenis" and another one, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if it is necessary for you to take good care of your work with great vigilance so that no medicine falls on the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 If the paper becomes damp afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, start the medicine again on that part which has been properly cleansed with clean paper, as you did before; afterwards cure it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the mulleth leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hairs of men are different in size and according to that, your treatment should be varied; do not change the correct path for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in your lap; and the assistant should hold the patient's head between his hands so that it does not move or change position; after placing a piece of cotton dampened with egg white or linen dipped in oil on the fistula, heat the cautery until it is red hot like the tip of a falcon's beak, and apply it to the fistula as described by the shape of a vulture's head. The cautery should be shaped accordingly, pointed from one end to the other, or like a tent; however, the former shape is more suitable for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After opening the fistula if it is open, remove the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it, remove the bowel, and apply the hot cautery to the abscess formation, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the oil so that your hands do not go astray; and immerse the cautery in the oil and corrode it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If that is not the case, start the cautery again once more, and if needed, leave it for three days; afterwards put moist cotton in butter on it, and cure it with drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put corrosive medicine on it as long as the bone is exposed; and the king will decide according to his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for a fistula that no ancient one said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 For the fistula, and cut it open; then put in the slit the camahan substance of this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it in the amount of one walnut shell; hold your hand tightly with camphor, and the patient must not move at all, so that the melted plaster does not spatter on his oil; and you should put cotton soaked in egg white or olive oil on the patient. The plaster will heat the fistula and heal it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then administer purgatives to the newborn, and bring the fistula to the body of the newborn according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cavity in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often cavities in lips called "hairs" occur, even in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When the treatment of these cavities as we have described in divisions does not help, then burn (with) a small cautery spoon in this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place him urgently into those cavities until it reaches the fountain; afterwards, cure the place with sulfur until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess from the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it has become pus-filled and grown and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, plug or seal the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron is hot at its source and where it ends; and do this once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The double movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but that is of no use, then put the head of the patient in a hot bath; afterwards, heat the cautery in such a manner as you place a cane on the tooth; and push the heated cautery into the tooth quickly, hold your hand so the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; after that, release your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; afterwards, fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the moving tooth is made firm, and the softened gums are kept tight, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or wetness, and there is either cold or fever, and the medicines do not work, then it is necessary to use a cautery according to two ways: a cauterization with butter and a cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow, and heat the end of an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it in cold butter, and apply it to the painful tooth immediately and hold until it is cooled; do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and linen moistened with cold butter, apply it again, and heat one hot iron on top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The fire cautery is such that you take a wire of iron or copper, and it should be large enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, as its shape will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then blow hard; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery on whatever part you wish, and according to your ability; this is the form of the cane.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofulous ulcers are of cold fluids and do not respond to medications, then heat the cautery hair as described below and have it open for the smoke to escape from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess where necessary, until it reaches the source of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use a smaller amount of cautionery and leave it for three days; cover it with soft cotton soaked in butter until the pain subsides; after that, apply ointment and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the arm:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 The shape of the arm: When moisters conquer the channels of the elbow and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards, cauterize at the root of the throat, but do not go as far as the throat, and do not risk burning but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the first cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, make another cauterization called "clavicle," from which we have the shape mentioned before; and heal the place until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the pormon are caused by cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever nor sore, and the disease is ancient, perform two cauterizations on the elbow; and another cautery between two breasts; and let the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the form that has been mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you wish to do it, make cauterization by pricking all the cautery called "points" from which the shape is mentioned in ear diseases before; and the points should go up to 30 or around that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the joint as previously stated, let the fire cautery have three layers according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason, the cauteries are lighter, because you make four at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, the patient should lie on his back and on his side; then take hold of the swelling inside the affected area with your left hand's fingertips; if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two nerves as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and apply the cautery to the swelling until it pierces through to the rib, and brings forth the figure of the cautery with four cauteries; and for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has two nerves, because the figures of cauterization are such; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has two nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined on this, namely the nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery, break it with lard; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated above [the joint], which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod, or many small cauteries when pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is set back in place, and the moisture is removed, and the patient's wound is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When cold and moisture come in the stomach, and multiply the catarrh [illness] within him, and in customary ways of treatment it does not help; therefore, the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After that, perform the third cautery underneath the spoon-shaped bone (pulley) with a quantity of one finger's length, to the entire sharp cautery, and perform the second cautery across the two costal sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and there should be such space between one and another that they are not joined together when they release pus; and let the cautery be so pointed that it pierce both parts of the bone, and let the figure of the cauteries be as shown in this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pointing and pressing on the stomach at the appropriate size; then cauterize the entire cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the wound has taken place, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 For the liver, pain comes from coldness, moisture, and great windiness, if it is forced out of its natural composition by superfluidities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help him. If the patient must be supine on his backside, three cauteries should be performed according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondriac region, where the ribs of the chest come; and there should be space between each cautery the size of a thumb; and the cauterizations should be long and not pressed too hard with your hand; and only half the incense should be burned, and the patient should be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your intention is to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel, do so if you are skilled and wise in the art, but beware not to burn too deep, for you would scorch the entire body; also do not go beyond boiling point, for the heat is very subtle there, and the scalpel can easily see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 If there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the liver's flesh or its covering: if it is in the flesh, the patient does not feel much pain; but if it is in the covering, the pain is madness-like.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment leaves the patient, it is necessary that the patient remain awake on his head; then press firmly on the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a razor blade, of which the shape is like this:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And burn the fire cautery until the coal is burning, and approach to syphac, as far as it can be fully purged; afterwards, cure according to the treatment of sores until it is healed; and this cauterization should not be used by anyone who has not studied long in the art of medicine, for many times such diseases have been caused thereby.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can boldly operate, and yet it seems to me that moving is of more value.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the plaster cauterion
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one should perform cauterizations for pleurisy using the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and let it be dry, as big and long as your thumb; dip it in oil, put it on fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind a little bit; and one cautery at the side, and one other on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest away from the cautionery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And an old man said that no one uses the fire cauterization resembling the razor, and they warm it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and the pain flees away, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then consider the following three methods of cautery, which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 Another way to perform a cautery is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and remove the flesh that is next to the mouse, or the patient's side comes towards the left, and raise the elevations of the flesh according to the direction of the flesh, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After putting the two nerves inflamed, heat them until the other side's pores are pierced, and then pull out the fire-cautery; thus there will be four. If you see, cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After treatment when it has discharged pus for a long time, it is necessary that the other treatments mentioned earlier be applied.
de ydropisie	From hydropisy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 The cautery does not help in dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When the cure according to the ways we have said in divisions does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the boil, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back near the spine, and one at the worst place; and the cauteries should be close to the thick part of the pore.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery open for a long time to expel pus, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions will be achieved together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen is the claw as we have shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it has been described before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in a person who is edematous and full of citrine, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the ring finger and little finger; and dip your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too deep, so that the citrine is not too strong; and let the cautery be in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making .2 cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife, let one be beneath the knee and the other outside, within the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for long healing time, until the water subsides; after healing other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	reduction (of swelling)
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the hernia of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive powers that are in the stomach and intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then do the following: make a large cautery on the stomach as described earlier in the text "cautery of the stomach" or "circumferential cautery"; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one subtle cautery at the clavicle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see excessive moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the arm, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach to the side of the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when aid is available.
de la cure des emorroydes	The Treatment of Hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When hemorrhoids are deep-rooted, one or more, and are old and contain large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help if you do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, this which is completely outside the spinal column and gradually triangular, and the cautery under the belly; and if you think that the stomach has become cooled, and the meat does not cook, and the face swells up, then let a large cautery be applied to the stomach as it has been described before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the limb until it is sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the charnosity (called) "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with thelul (the abscess), if you heat up the cautery that seems like a razor, and then place it all burning on the abscess, leave your hand there so that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, cutting off the blood; do this once or twice, and if there is much abscess, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards, treat with ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery on an ulcer, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, which we shall describe in its place, this disease comes that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When a fistula comes, it is swollen and filled with pus and decayed matter, you should probe it completely with a subtle test, and ensure that you know the depth of the probing to its full extent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the size of the probing that has entered it, and repeat the cautery until the body burns and decays, once or twice, depending on the extent of the problem; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are near or the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestine, be careful with these parts and do not perform such actions outside a charnel house, for it is not wise; after curing the limb until it is sound, if the limbs are sutured and the matter has been removed for a long time, know that the limb is healed entirely; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the bone is broken and rotten in that place, as one of those we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the groin and with great swelling, and it does not respond to female treatments, then you must perform fire cautery on both sides of the groin using the sharp-pointed cautery as previously stated; and if we apply a thousand cauterizations in a line, it will have more effect.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder becomes soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform fire cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, each cauterization should be as long as your thumb; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if necessary; and make the cauteries sharp-pointed according to the previously mentioned shape.
de la marris	of the marriage (or union)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marriage (or union) is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, they cause great pain: then it must be done that you apply four cauteries around the belly, as we have said the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the haunch (the upper part of the thigh)
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the hinge of the knee joint, causing it to move out of its place; and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints at the end of the limb are visible if necessary, then you shall cauterize the patient on the knee joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the joint around the hinge so that the hinge is within the circle; and if the cauteries are like those used for cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make four large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cauterizes be as sharp as all other knives; and apply them until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the knee
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the belly of the loin, and it is due to coldness and moisture; and the patient is treated as we have said in the division but the treatment is not effective, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient with pills made from foul humors, or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 Afterwards, perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two ways: namely with burning substances, and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 The cauterization by fire has several ways, one of which is such that you cauterize above the breastbone with three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and width, and leave space between each cautery about the size of a thumb, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped; sometimes a cauterization is made in the middle above the breastbone, for which there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, it should be cauterized with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the loin; but make it in such a way that the circles enclose the entire loin, and all the fat around the kidney is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method used in sciatica, when the pain remains in the back and does not reach as far as the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, you should apply the fire cautery where the pain is felt, and the cautery should be four fingers above the ankle, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be a knife-cautery, and let the thickness of the coal be heated; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two feet or close by, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four inches from the cautery called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a blade or circular cautery, but be careful in all your cauteries to not overdo it so that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have personally seen more who have applied the fire cautery above the ankle of the foot, and they let it stay until the leg was completely swollen, and the feet too, and all the toes were pierced and damaged.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly solution from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places together, make cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And say to the cautery in the groin, as follows, make this kind of iron and be as thick as a nail of a thumb or slightly less, and be perforated or perforated from one end to another with the thickness of a nut of a finger; and let the perforations be above two parts, and be like needles, and have the iron well made; and this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it becomes completely red and hot, then place it on the sick armpit and turn it over the healthy side; and cauterize once with the iron rod lengthwise and leave for four days; then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; after the healing ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its gaze, and those who use it sparingly; however, this is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and the place where it burns.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The cautery of burning medicine is such that you prepare the instrument inside the hollow space within the door, and it should be made of iron or steel, long in length, and have two openings at its top; and there should be the size of a thumb between each opening; and they should face outwards and upwards, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the basin of the pincers on the sick person lying on his side, with your hand slightly above the basin of the pincers; then pour between the two circles of hot iron that has been heated in the fire pit and leave it for an hour, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it burns as if by fire, and when the bite has passed, take your hand with the tool and gently lift the swelling, and leave it for three days; and apply butter until the blackness from the burn is removed; and leave it for three days so that pus may drain out; and this would be the final aid after the ointment treatment until it heals.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the tool that burns similarly as in the swelling; and this is the method of hot water, and I have written or treated it for the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take alkali and hot coal, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put the mixture in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 Make sure there is a small hole in the lid that the tip of a rose can enter through; and put this pot on another well-sealed pot, and add alkali and coal with soft water above it so that you have enough powder on top when you grab it with your hand; then leave it like that until the mixture settles or the pot stops bubbling or boiling, then take all of that liquid and pour it over coal and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And when it becomes hot and is administered in the process of medical work and in other cauteries for other members, for it performs a similar task to fire, and if used with other medicines such as thistle root, honey, and wax with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure by which a nobleman was cured of the pain of hemorrhoids and sciatica, and he praised it greatly, and said that no other cure was made for it, and that he became well at once when this cure was performed, and he bathed himself as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says that you take fresh green powdered litharge and mix it with a little fat, then apply it to the hemorrhoids, the thigh, and the leg where the pain is felt, and hold it there; leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter a bath until his body is slightly warm, and have him lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be well.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such a fire cautery, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is burned with goat's horn, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and anoint it with old oil, then place it in the hollow between the toe of the foot and the one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dry goat's horn, heat it over the fire until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the linen and leave it until it cools; repeat this process as many times as you think is necessary for the pain to subside; and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes from the back, either from falling or from blows or from too great evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these causes should receive cauterization except for one who receives an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to proceed in this manner for the patient to be given pills or similar substances placed on the back where the pain occurs, marked with three lines of incision, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cauterization should be made as described by the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do four cauteries or two at the medium-sized cautery in accordance with this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This malady often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have narrow anus when they strain and fear; you will find it in the lower spine of the back and observe its appearance above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this [condition] and wish to treat it, cauterize it using the cautery of this kind in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The fire cautery increases each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery piercing it at intervals of two or three lines and the points should be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the limb when it is healthy as we have said, beware not to apply the cautery in a place where there is a nerve spine.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is due to swelling affecting every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called gout properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, it is cured by cautery in this manner: make the patient lie down with the affected joint on a bed, and the cautery should be olive oil shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to pierce on the face of the thigh, you should cauterize with the entire cautery as they claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pain comes up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, you should cauterize on each knee with three or four olive-shaped cauteries on each part, and if necessary, do more, but do not hold your hand further than until the shaft of the knife is burnt.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make a prick at both sides of the wrist; and if there is no pain in the fingers, prick on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and think about medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give him good care and cleanse him with urine, he will be cured with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the sifac
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the dislocation comes in the form of an angry boil that descends into the joints and occurs suddenly, it is necessary to treat it when you see it. You should not let him eat anything on that day; and you should use things that loosen the belly, so that the phlegm descends from the stomach. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to grip his wings (possibly referring to the arms) until the boil is repaired, and hold his elbow with both hands, and press on the bone of the joint at the base of the thumb, and give a sign similar to half a circle above the torso. Then heat the cautery in the shape as shown here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it becomes white and emits pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then pull the shoulders back into place; and the minister places his hand on top so they do not return to their original position; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put the cushion and sergeant on the thighs, and the other one on the affected part which holds the hands; then place the cautery on the sign all over your hand, hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you come to the bone; be careful that the boil does not erupt while you are doing the cautery, that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And the cauteries for children should be fine according to their measure, and those of big people as big as theirs; after three days, cure the place where the cautery was burned with butter until the burn is healed; after that, use other ointments until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary to let the urine be released for a long time, so that the feces do not protrude when he needs to go to the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, bring a well-made straw mattress for him and leave it for another 40 days; let him rest well, so that he does not overwork himself, drink too much or eat too much, or cough too loudly; and when he follows these instructions, he will be fully healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will tell you after the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the hernia of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When round worms appear in other wombs and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, then apply the cautery of cautery according to its size, and let it burn one third of the flesh; afterwards treat it as we have said; and none of the ancients say that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the left side and make a line across the worm above it, and another below it, and then press your hand on the entire cautery handle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any member, either from falling or being injured, and the pain lasts a long time, and the medicines do not work, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "point", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, its virtue and location for twisting and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If the first application of the fire cautery heals, that is good; but if it does not heal, repeat another cautery on the same place, because such is the custom that it should heal the limb near it; therefore you must perform the cauteries until the patient heals.
de meselerie	When pain comes in any joint, whether from falling or injuring, and this pain lasts for a long time and medicine does not cure it, then you must cauterize it with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the condition of the joint and its size, weakness, nature, virtue, location for twisting and pain. If the first cautery is healthy, that's good; if not, repeat another cauterization on it, as it is customary that the injured joint should heal first, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient recovers.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The messel is sometimes helped by cautery with great aid, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fleume and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see him being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and there is no discharge nor residue, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: hold the head with one hand, and the other toward the forehead at the end of the hair; and II (cauteries) over the II (corner bones), and I (cautery) behind the neckbone; and leave your hand thus that the cauterization reaches the bone, and such that the scabs come out forcefully so that the vapors of the gross humors may escape; and cauterize on the mice (swellings/tumors) according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease (meselerie) is spread everywhere; it will certainly perish, you must cauterize it with the cauteries that we have said, namely one cautery on the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the shinbone and one small one there as well, and two on each shoulder; two on the sides, two on the thigh tendons, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware not to burn the nerves that are near the last calcaneum, and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you do with cautery, the more help it provides and benefits him; and know that the sick do not feel pain during cauterization as the healthy do, because his body is already entirely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And the cautery should be deep or shallow according to the members and joints, as you will find in ways of using irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the shoulder with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is drained.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not drained, then cauterize the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be slightly deep into the flesh; then treat with oil until it is drained.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes they make a fire cautery to the hand and foot, back, at the place where the nerve is silent, and thus if it is opened the flesh; and yet nobody should interfere unless he knows about the members and the openings of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	When a boil or abscess occurs on any member and it is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then perform cauterization on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cauterization be a little hole in the flesh's depth. Then cure it with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes, they make cauterization at the hand, foot, back, at the nerve issue that renders the limb immobile, and thus the boil or abscess is removed; and in no case should anyone interfere if they are not familiar with the members and the issues of moving nerves.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" matures, and the medicinal remedy has no effect, then cauterize it with a deep cautery, according to the size of the flesh's depth, until the bladder is expelled, and its color changes; then cure it with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and cow blood and hawk blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together, tie it with a cloth, and apply it to the spot until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of scrofula (chancre) by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil starts appearing and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle all around the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 But the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the boil; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I believe it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen sometimes; and a more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule", as we have said in the discussion of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The swelling that cannot grow.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which delays healing or due to the excess it causes, or due to the age of the patient when they are weakened (meaning very old) and have little blood, or due to the long time; and you see it hurry to heal: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; afterward leave it.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Then it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced with all the cautery, heat the cautery in this manner:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels the heat so that the flow of pus is reduced.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment when it becomes perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure for fire is with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another type of disease is called "corrosion", and it is nothing but an erosion of the limb, because it consumes the limbs as fire dries up dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then warm the cauteries little by little and strongly, as required for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, all that is corrupted should be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and put on the affected areas softened crushed cautery with oil so that the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the healing of onions producing char.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if you see after three days that healthy char does not appear, it is good; and if not, repeat the cautery on the corrupted lesion.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 This burn is sometimes cured with ague medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for ague in the division: take it when needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	diseases that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often, at the feet, there arises a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large, swollen thing that bites the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 This is to know fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 The iron hot cautery is heated like a feather of a poultry, and made of good iron to the size that it can penetrate a nail from all sides and has subtle margins; then place it on the nail and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail; leave it in this way for three days until it begins to emit pus; then make an ointment with wild herbs boiled with oil, and leave the ointment on it all night, and the nail will be extracted and uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the shoulder with soothing salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if it has been turned outwards by the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply hot cautery; and this is done as follows: take a cane of iron or copper, or a feather from a bird, and put it on the nail and the affected area, that is to say to remove verrues (warts); and place the cane so it surrounds completely, then put some hot oil there, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane touches the root of the nail, and may find the hot oil to penetrate to the root; and let the patient endure a little biting of the hot oil for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will uproot itself with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus, as with another [patient], while you are cauterizing all those on the body, then heal the burns caused by the fire.
li cure dou trembler	The healer treats the shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from cold or quartan fever or other causes, you must perform four or five fire cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the foot, and one above the stomach with the olive cautery; this will make the trembling stop, and the healthiness will depart from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of putrid buboes
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes the body appears swollen with boils or pus-filled blisters, which come from rotten materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 First, when they appear, it is necessary to apply a cautery on each head of the boil: a thin cautery made from myrtle stick, so that its point is immersed in fire, or a long root of arum, or a cautery lenticulaire.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes, the cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluities from which they come are dissolved, and they become healthy; however, it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great losses of blood from the cut artery at the wound or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; it is a very bad thing to let it flow.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	However, when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it tightly so that the blood is stopped from flowing out; then apply several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the size of the wound and the location where the artery is damaged, and place the cautery on that vein or the finger you are holding, and hold the cautery there until the blood flow has stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the artery suddenly jumps when you press your finger on the vein, and the cauteries go out, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop performing one after the other until the wound is closed; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when a vein stops flowing from the artery, it cannot be kept closed by itself when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by tightly tying it with thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to keep blood in; and it should be tied and held together.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings a tight binding of linen or places hot things or similar things on it, if it does not help, will not profit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have any medicine present, he should put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly over the wound and over the vein; and do not move it, but the cold liquid should be often applied that is very cold until the wound is frozen and thickened and closed; and make inquiries ahead about what kind of cauteries and medicines are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease where cautery of fire or burning medicine is necessary, and we have discussed its causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; I have placed that chapter at the head, and I will continue in this chapter along the same path since those things are easier to understand.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason, it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you to avoid foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 Those who arrive in such a state of illness that they die easily due to the madness their disease brings and the great severity of their condition are to be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And there are those who give you their word and say "wait, I am cured", but the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 You should not readily agree with those who come to you with this attitude, but place more value on your honor than your desire, and do not trust foolishly but wisely from those about whom you are certain and from whom you can obtain knowledge; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients to convert health, and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and a lasting memory for praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear noble son, Our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have divided this chapter into sections for easier understanding, following the order of the 'cauteries' section, which I have already explained from head to feet, as you may find it easier to understand what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	a head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is known that this illness often comes to children during childbirth and when the head of the child is squeezed too hard; sometimes it occurs for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this illness in anyone other than children, and all those that I have seen hurried toward death; therefore it seems to me that it is worth my while to abandon the work in some treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulders were filled with water and the head swelled every day until it could no longer sustain it; and the moisture was assembled under the bone near the skull; therefore, when the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can run out; and here is the form of the lancet:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, you should make two incisions in the shape of a cross, as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone and the signs that you see show the joints of the head opening on each side, and it jumps sharply when pressed with your hand inside, and it does not respond: then you must make three incisions in the head.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then after the incision remove linens and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it until the fifth day; then undress it and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the swelling reduce gradually, and give the patient dry meat of fresh flesh as long as the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look for the size of the abscess, and where the sharpness is; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, make the incision where the abscess is open and empty the liquid; perform the procedure as you are able; and be careful not to cover the artery; if blood flows, it may cause the patient's death from excessive bleeding and evacuation of fluid.
de reume	Open the affected area and drain the pus. Perform the treatment as you can; be mindful not to close off the artery; if blood emerges, it could lead to the patient's death due to excessive bleeding and removal of fluid.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens that a disease called "cataract" affects the eyes or worsens, and medicine does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization by burning the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you want to bind it, the patient should sit behind his head; after that, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then grasp the patient's neck with the cloth; then look where the veins run, and those on both sides are found behind the ears, and they are brought together; then mark the places to cut, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, until it reaches the bone, and this should be wide enough through the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you pierce [the vein], push the spatula beneath the artery and strike it above, making an incision like two fingers' width through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is pierced, it jumps up continuously without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery does not open on its own, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then press and make incision up to the bone; and that which is needed to apply blood pressure is 6 centimeters (or approximately a little more or less), according to what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without swelling, if the pus from an abscess does not come, then hold the wound closed and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	From migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migration comes and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old senility madness and similar things, and it is treated by means of medicine cures and all that does not help him, we should expose the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have stated.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient bends his head backwards against the hairs on his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not difficult to locate except in some very cold people; and if it is located, the patient pulls on its neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with a sharp cloth, and warms the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then takes the spatumile, as shown:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it towards the incisions and separate well the tissues that are underneath from each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the incision, then hold the part according to the quantity of 2 fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut open, it cannot move entirely by itself.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw blood from the .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the arteries are large, it is necessary that you tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come out before the wound of the cut, and there is flowing of blood; then cut off the excess between the .ij. ligaments at that very hour, and if you see, then cauterize the wound made by the cautery knife up to the bone until the joints are cut; and this is the muedre operation, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterizing is aid to end the swellings: for this reason it is a greater aid to swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that a person fill the place with old cotton and put good stitches on top; and when they are untied, it should be cured with dry medicines that make pus, and with stitches until it is healed; and if without a cut from the artery as you work, hurry to cover with cauterizing, or use vitriol and strain your hand so that the wound does not bleed; and if this is not available, put your finger on the place until it freezes, and scrape the place with cold water until it stops bleeding, and tighten as necessary; and that which is muedre (festering) and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery twice, but they should be well thickened to keep their warmth longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the straw is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two blades, one thick of space, and then when you have signed it with incision on the two sides, and you place the iron hot over it until it reaches the bone, and cut open the vein in the two sides; and they should be separated from the two heads because it is not welded by this cautery all over; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the eyes are draining from veins that are above the head of the testicle, and there is no help from medicine that one can make, and you see the patient writhing in pain, and the forehead seems to shiver like with tremors; and they are tender and moist so that the hair of the scrotum falls out, and the scrotum becomes inflamed, and burned by the heat of the eyes, this type of treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And it was called the "contused cure" by the ancients, and you should make an incision at the back of the patient who has this disease on his forehead. Then you shall make three equal cuts across the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one of the cuts as if passing through the entire forehead from the top down to the nose, and the other two along the cheekbones above the eyebrows, be careful not to cut the arteries located above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the continuation of the mandibles, and let each wound be the length of three fingers joined together. Then prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth for cleaning the blood, then insert the sharp spatula as shown in the figure below:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the first incision at the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts along the bone, then continue from the mid-incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first cut, it should be very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And push the sharp edge towards the bone, soften it and press until it comes to the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And pluck out all the hairs that descend from the head as far as the incision reaches to the point of the bone, and continue in the middle incision on the other side; then press equally to take out blood; press firmly at the place where the blood has been taken; put a piece of old cotton on each incision, put moist cloths of wine and oil and alum on top, and make sure no pus comes out; on the third day remove the suture, and apply a large amount of cool mustard plaster, then treat with basilicon ointment, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	the root of the eye(s)
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a sudden cataract usually comes, and you see the eyes becoming weak and small, and the vision becomes blurred, and the eyelids burn, and if the patient experiences pain in the head, and the patient coughs; then you should know by these symptoms that these materials and the cataract do not come from a single vein, but rather many. And the treatment for this condition is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is that you instruct the patient to bend back his head, then make a great incision along the forehead and another deep one below the eye socket.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 From the incision of the left temple to the right temple and let it go up to the bone; move your hand away from the nerves that move with eating; when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge; then press between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, then thread of flax; then cover it with dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to get an abscess hot; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until char starts to grow, then treat it with things that cause char to grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Then mix two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; administer it to these wounds to promote fleshy growth all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of stopping the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar items such as iron; seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils and similar things; or something flowing, like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear stone or in any other way that does not align with the ear and does not fit in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see a stone, apply a little purple oil or camphor oil, then introduce extraction; and make him vomit with incision, and stop his nostrils when vomiting comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold it above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often vomiting occurs with this treatment; if it does not occur, extract the ear with subtle tweezers in the following manner:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it farts out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, extract it using fine tweezers with a small loop; and if it does not come out this way, make a catheter of beeswax, push its tip into the ear canal forcefully, and stop the surrounding area with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the catheter; then pull it out forcefully, as farting often comes in this manner; and if it does not come out in this way, take a snail (glut) of what you need, put it on any instrument suitable for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the snail onto the object or whatever it may be, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the ear does not jump from all these things that we have said, quickly cut the ear before an abscess or spasm comes, and the method of the cutting is that you first drain the patient's head of the cephalique fluid, then draw out the blood according to the measure of its potency, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs; and the cut should be like a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it as much as you can, and suck quickly with your mouth; and cure it until it heals.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is pus that swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a thin, subtle spatula in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 Make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Do not make the incision when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with delicate forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In water then that falls into the ear, the patient should use warm gargling with first-degree medicines and fill the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And lie down on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it does not jump out, take many small and slender pebbles according to the depth of your eye socket and heat them slightly in fire; then make the patient lie down on his side with the affected ear upwards, and place the pebbles on the outer part and press one at a time with another pebble from the other side, and pierce one pebble onto the pebble in the ear; do not stop applying the pebbles to the pebble until the water comes out completely, and it jumps out entirely; and if you see, take a string, and insert one of the pebbles into the ear, and the other end of the string grasps fire until the closest pebble is burned; then repeat this process with other strings until the water comes out completely, as we have said in the previous section.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it is small like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large that can be felt, bring forth extraction by tweezers; and it is the lighter thing to remove that is within the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of worms in ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where distillation is used, but the treatment does not help, then you should observe the ear under the sun: if any worms open up, remove them with fine tweezers, and if no worms appear, take the snake-shaped device shown here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it shall be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Place the finest point of the head (i.e., the tip) into the ear according to the degree of pain of the patient, then press strongly on the entire neck; do this frequently until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 If it does not come out, stop the neck with cotton as I mentioned in the previous section; and if they do not swell as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective for treating worms, and you will find or treat them with distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear to this extent, as you can see from the following formula:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be narrow at the bottom with a small silver or brass tube and wide above for distillation; and for pressing inside the distillation with an instrument of brass well made for this purpose, and if you see, take a scraper and wrap cotton around its tip; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then push the scraper into all the cotton and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear becomes heated; and let the patient smell inside, and let the distillation be heated for a moment as it would be in the ear; but keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of stopping the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some kind of swelling in the ears; and this same thing happens in men due to an injury or abscess within the ear, and this swelling sometimes completely fills the ear, if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only one hole visible, and it can be easily seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it completely fills the ear and cannot be seen, it is difficult to treat in various positions, and in this case you must place the sick person's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the swelling apparent, you should open it with a spatula of the kind shown here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and thin all around so that it does not burn the ear; if the swelling is from pus or cartilage of the ear, hold it with fine forceps and press lightly until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the opilation is fully in the ear, take a subtle razor lightly and heat it slightly over fire, then place it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the opilation that causes the patient pain in the ear, pierce it gently and ensure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a tube according to the size of the perforation and moisten it with the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Every day, as long as the wound is healing, take a bandage and moisten it with rosewater, and powder fine vitriol on it; if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to remove the bandage and apply another damp bandage made of rose oil and wax until the swelling disappears; then continue to heal it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh (or skin) of the papery ones
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	That which comes from the skin of papery ones (when they are moist and dry), should be stretched with tweezers and forceps, and then struck at its roots with a spatula; afterwards put vitriol powder on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it cannot be peeled off, then cauterize it with the subtle cautery of lentil size and after incision is worth more; and many times it repairs itself, where nothing remains from its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the scab
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Often come in papers some things that seem like hail in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hailstone," and it is a gathering of large moisture on the paper above and below; the treatment is as follows: keep watch to ensure that the hailstone moves from one side to another, and it is easy to know; then make an incision in a wide area, then gently remove the scab from each side, then take with tweezers and crush.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it with a bandage and poke a little hole in the paper, do not worry the patient at all; and if the wound is large, gather it together with stitches and let it heal as long as it heals; and if it is small, do not apply force, because the ointments restore it quickly and relieve pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over and take hold of the hail with tweezers, crush it and press from both sides; if the paper is displaced by the incision, do not worry about it; when the hail has been crushed, apply salty oil and heal the affected area until the patient recovers.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 This is an ointment that is spread on paper bandages mostly for children and it causes much discomfort to their eyes, and in the mornings they get catarrh, and cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; therefore they lie down immediately, sleep, and have their paper bandages wet under their eyelids covered with ointment that opens in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then place it on top; and press with both hands from one side and another, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make a cut in the middle using a sharp spatula with a width not larger than the wound that one makes when opening a vein; and cut the skin as far as you see the exinach; and sometimes exinach comes out from the cut, according to the shape of a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand left and right until it is spread out; and ensure that you do not add to the cut, that you do not come all the way to the oil, and that you do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the start of the wound, lift up the wound slightly; then pull it apart as we have said, then wet cloths in warm and cold water, and place them on the wound, and hold bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such men who grind silk and put it on for corrupting that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, heal it until it is sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess comes to the joint that is hot, then heal it with plasters soothing until it is sound.
des poilz des papieres	hairs from paper (translated literally)
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper lice are born with hair unlike nature, and grow up, they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as tear ducts that become accustomed to weeping and softening of the paper, causing destruction of the eyelashes; and the cure is in four ways: either by cautery together with fire, or by medication according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by tweezers, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must hold the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper lice from the oil to your left hand; if it is turned over, that is good; if not, push an awl through one of its filaments; and cut it off at the edge where the hairs grow out of those eyelashes, and pull one filament up across the entire paper, then shave it; then make an incision under the paper, under the eyelashes, all the way from the large tear duct to the small one; then draw one filament, and place a small tent of cotton and gauze under the paper, then sew a fiddlehead of mirte or similar material on top of the paper, and it is essential that the figure be according to the quantity of the paper you intend to raise.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if it is necessary to apply a large amount of paper according to how the paper is softened; then, they should place it all along the splint you have drawn, starting from the large blister to the small one; and it should be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the onion into one of the two angles of the key, then peel off everything; then bring together the two lips with a stitch of a needle and thread of fine wool, and drain the blood, and tie up the excess threads with anything sticky, if you wish to do so; and if not, do not bother about it, then leave the stitch and threads for 3 or 4 days; then heal the wound without a stitch using dry and constricting things, because the paper heals the wound at its edge and binds it together, but the stitch is rotten (as they say in ancient times), and this is work with fear; and there is another way: and it is that you should sign the paper with a figure similar to the furrow of myrtle, as we have told, with three onions sewn according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then draw equally across the small openings according to the following form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure; insert the other end of the thread through the large opening, and the second end through the small one, and arrange the threads equally between your fingers; then lower your hand equally, and lower all the skin as you have described, then sew up the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar soothing substances; sometimes the hair of the scab becomes converted: in such a case you must use what we have said about the incision; but sewing in one and the other is more artistic.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for boils is as follows: You must convert the papyrus and make it inside according to what I have said, then make 2 caines by art, and 2 fine threads as long as the papyrus and the width of a spatula; and tie together the 2 parts where you hold the threads; next, assemble the one and the other subtly on top of the papyrus covered with oil, and bind the 2 caines from the 2 parts together; leave it for some days, and the skin that is bound will rot and die, until it bursts through.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it [the wound] takes a long time to heal, if the copious force is applied to it, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sutured, and the paper is raised, and the hairs will not grow anymore; and this is the shape of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	1. The work (ovraiges) is such that you take a fine needle, and insert a thread of silk and fine yarn; then assemble the joints carefully and put them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be about a palm (of your hand); then arrange another thread of fine silk briefly, and tie its end; then make the patient place their head in your hand; and expose it to the sun so that the work is visible, for it is subtle and delicate work, then push the needle through the entire length of the channel in the root of the hair next to the natural hair, and pierce it quickly into the paper until you pull it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the channel, and insert the channel with the hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out of the entire channel with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the channel is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the channel below to the thread that you have arranged, until the channel comes out through the hole and can be seen by the oil; then you will draw the channel and the thread, close the oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and new flesh forms; if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair and let it grow with this one, until it is elongated and then cut it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purification of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this illness called "alecrate" or the ulcer comes in the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it occurs suddenly due to a wound, or surgery, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of work on it is that you cut the suture, separate the edges, put linen tents inside and hold it until it heals; and do not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the disease worsens more than the first; but for softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or oil and flax seed cooked, and immediately afterward dip it in almond oil and wrap it in a cloth, and cure with that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care not to let it heal in its original form; and this work, which we have said, does not remedy this disease unless it is addressed correctly so that it does not return in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the fat that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the procedure in this case is that you take a needle with double thread, and stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the threads come out in the two cheeks of the flesh; then place the flesh above the entire needle, and apply the spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shoulder figure (shoulder blade) returns as it should, that's good; if not, take the rasp and place it in the crack, and turn the shoulder, and make two cracks where the costal cartilage is inside the shoulder; and let the shoulders be from the two cracks at the two angles of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure should be like the figure of a letter which has the name "Greek cross"; then remove that cartilage, according to its thickness that its sides are rounded beneath the shoulder, afterwards join the two separated parts with a linen thread; then treat it as we have said regarding softening medicines and poultices, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the patient's illness comes from a wound or stitching or cautery, then you must make a clean incision under the hairs of the papery area, as previously stated; then press between the two layers of a tent, as I said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine with all possible skill so that the figure returns to its natural shape; and the patient themselves, according to what the work and instruments require in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	under the papery area
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this kind of suture occurs in men in such a way that the papery area above is sealed with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must cut the tip of a razor under the papery area, lift it up; hold it with forceps until you reach the subcutaneous fat, which should not be too sharp nor too deep so that the patient does not suffer from a sharp spatula piercing the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, should be gentle, so that the papery area returns to its natural form; and this entire assembly becomes healed, and sometimes it is made salty with acidic oil, and the acidic liquid lifted, and colloid; then place between the papery area and the oil a tent of linen, and place wool dampened with egg on the oil; and after three days use the colloid and other healing substances until it becomes healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nail has two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard thing, and another that is not nervous but resembles white moist matter congealed; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot heal; and both resemble toward the large root, and grow little by little until it covers all the nail and all the light and movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then opens the eyes; take paper with your hand, then clip the nail with small tweezers, and lift it up; then take a needle, and put a horse hair or ox hair, or strong thread on it; double the tip of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the nail with thread and lift it up, and shave all the hair from the side of the nail that is near the skin and the silk to the hair until the root, then grind away the rest in the root of the finger to the softest part and smallest forces, and leave the natural flesh or root, so that the body does not produce tears as usual; and sometimes the nail is set on the incision only, and at the fillet, as we have said; then shave off all the soft part of it in this way:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the flesh layer and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a small amount of crushed egg yolk, and from collyrium made of litharge, leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nerve-like, and you cannot insert a needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, this type of nail is often treated with medicine; and they grow as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take the spatula, sharp point according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then cut the nail thinly and if you see that it does not shrink at all and the reason is pressing, distill from your mouth into the oil collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and crushed egg yolk, and stop the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this procedure until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts you in oil, like an abscess, then drain it and first heal the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the wound worsens in oil due to great harm, suspend it at the incision, and cut a small part, not all, so that tears do not come; then distill red collyrium oil made of litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the cornea
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 The first hairs of some men sometimes grow red and cover the nipple, stay on top of the paper towels and turn towards the backside, resembling a rosebud from a briar; and this is the procedure: the patient places his head on your lap, then you operate the eyes, and all that charred area should be carefully cut along with the curved scissors as described in this chapter; and keep the cutting neat and avoid injuring the oil gland at the operation site; it is the incision of the spatula as described in the incision of the nail and the small tools used to remove the skin, as shown by the form after this chapter; and when the incision is complete and all the charred area is removed, apply the oil of linseed or you distill red collector's oil and similar corrosive medicines, spread cotton with egg white on top, ensuring it is securely covered; if anything remains, and the skin becomes swollen, and you doubt that it is fully cauterized, leave the oil and treat the cauterization with soothing remedies for cauterization. Return to your procedure when it is healed, and thus do this for each charred area treated in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you take care of each oil treatment with natural method and accidental method using iron; and do not put your hand in any of these treatments until you see that the limb is resistant to this procedure.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red veins covered with oil stop working when they are seen and weaken the oil for all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, you should first examine the oil to see if it is red veins covered with oil and there is no other illness but the sebel. Then take care in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then hold those veins for all time according to your wisdom, and let the fingers be subtle double in this way:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there shall be two pressures by degree in one hand, according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, gently press the veins with subtle forces, and withdraw the blood hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and be careful not to pierce the oil with the points of the spatulas, and perform this task at noon in front of the sun, and be very warm in your task so that you do not catch anything but the veins; and when you have done this, if you distill into the colyrium green and red oil for those who remain stuck in the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, apply a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of being healed, then continue according to this manner as before until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil duct
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a cavity in it where it should die, and you must cut open the abscess, removing all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, you will see the corruption and blackness, and you shall shape it with all the tools as shown here; and it is called "sharp head", and it should be made like a reamer for one head, and pointed like a file as shown in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the corrupt bone part, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is reduced; and do this once, then restore the place of healing medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the joint is fused, and pus forms in the shoulder, and the body of the bone is fused, and it remains so for 40 days without healing or becoming abscessed, and no bad accident occurs, knowing that it is healed; if not, there is no other device but to return the fistula to the breast in accordance with this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the iron as follows, and the iron head should be at three angles, and the shaft should be narrowed up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place the iron on the bone at the elbow and move your hand away from the oil pit, then turn the entire iron as far as it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through the veins if you keep your hand above the nipple; and then restore the joint with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the pus forms and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the nipple; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil exit
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are completely opened and there is no disturbance to the ship (meaning, when there is no swelling), it is necessary that you hold the patient; then clean, then apply ointment or oil of rue without causing injury, then apply oil made from acacia and aloe, incense, and sarcolocate, and then bind the oil, and plaster it over bandages and cloth; and the manner of the cloth is such that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and put one on top of another according to the amount required by the eyes; then bind with a strong bandage and repeat the ointment application without causing injury; then remove the ointment and leave the bound oil for day and night, and if the bandage becomes loosened, it is necessary that you tighten it; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the oil healing, it is good; if not, repeat the application of the ointment, plaster, bandage, and oil until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	For the bursting of a burst bladder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the burst bladder, then it fills with paper like a grain of resin and is easily visible; therefore, if you see it covered, the treatment is as follows: take an awl and insert it into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then insert another awl or a double-filed thread from the edge of the wound; pierce it, leaving the first awl according to its position; tie a part of the bladder around it and bind it tightly, then remove the awl and apply moistened linen oil abundantly; leave it until the filaments adhere with the bladder, then heal the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held in place by the bladder itself using a circular bandage of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show a large appearance, pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes fully filled with oil, and clear away the moisture albugine and dissolve the eyes, and enter immediately; then draw it out when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from being a boil which is assembled in oil, resembling an abscess descending, but it's not an abscess; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take his head between both hands from two sides, and move him until you see the boil coming up to your eyes; then it should be lanced, and neither drain nor open the light, and let the patient watch the things as he usually does; and if it does not drain below, know that it is an abscess, and if the draining of the boil is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Place the patient seated between your hands, then take the thin spatulum and place it on the corneal membrane I-spot through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and cornea, until it becomes soft; and when it is protruding, distill into it hot sharp oil mixed with honey, or oil boiled with fenugreek and honey; then let it be treated with another remedy until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	Of the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have similar symptoms to those of the eyes in their division, and what is required for piercing; if you work according to its health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 You must place the patient seated between your hands crossed, away from sunlight, and press the oil on it and hold very tightly; then take paper with the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or in your right hand if they are on the right side; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eyes are on the left side, or in your left hand if they are on the right side; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by about a finger's width in that part of the oil near the lesser lid, then push the almagda instrument skillfully and hold your hand firmly until it pierces through the cornea, and you will feel the almagda come to the empty area; and it is necessary that the passage of the almagda be at the full measurement of the space from the pupil to the end of the black part; this is the cornea of the oil; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then push the instrument up until it reaches the place where there is an arrow or other sharp object, then release pressure on another side.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 The patient should now put his fingers on it (the affected area), so he sees the instrument in front of him and anoints it with oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting a little while, and if the second passage (vein) rises again, put force with the instrument, and when it is in place and does not rise further, slightly straighten it by rotating your hand gently; then apply a little alum-soaked cloth on top of it, and pour oil over it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then put on it a linen cloth or bandage soaked in rose oil and egg, and bind it with oil of sage.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We and those of our time put on top a poultice made with much egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter into the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument that is called "alberit", of which this is its form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 Therefore pierce the joint only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply alum, as we have said; and for the completion of the work prepare the patient to sleep on his back in the dark room; and be careful of all movements, and give him light foods, and he should not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his position until the third day; then untie him in the same dark room, test his vision, and make him see some things, and then rebind him until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the time of the cure or after cutting, but it is necessary that you release it, because the pain increases quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess comes to a head, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct the one who soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, lance the eyelid and place gold or some ointment over it to cover for any day, and remain always in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then leave the house little by little and convert yourself to your case; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they do a remedy for almagda, which causes the liquid to flow out, but I have never seen anyone in our land with it, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the symptoms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are from araignée properly speaking:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of these is of the same subtlety, and the tail in four corners.
de la char sor le neis	of the pus in the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes born or are born various cysts, of which there are some that seem like scorpions from the feet; and if there are such or it has a cyst inflamed with a red color, and if it has a soft cyst of a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case, with the softer of those charms which is not hardened, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and apply the onion juice to those charms, and pull them strongly; then touch what you can sustain with a sharp, thin spatula on one side, until you know that that charm is completely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any residue remains that cannot be grasped, open it all with fine and light instruments, until there is nothing left; and if the sore or abscess remains closed, use the proper care; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize it as much as possible so that the pus is drained and all the sores are removed, then pour in honey or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If the nostrils are not opened and moisture comes up to the palace, you know it is healthy; if moisture does not pierce as it should, you know that a char has grown in the bone above, so the instrument does not come to cut: then you must insert a thick piece of flax thread, with spaces between each knot no smaller than necessary; and place the patient's head in the thread at its maximum strength, and pull it through the nose while smelling until it comes out through the mouth; children in schools do this many times, and it is easy for whoever wishes to perform it; then hold one head coming from the nose with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as we are who are pulling the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do what you know that they have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, squeeze the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in its place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of the flesh; and then put a plank splint on it for any number of days until it is healed, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as they say when distilling oils and medicines in the neck:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lantern, like a cane, and you should lead it so; and if you see, then make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full for purifying the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the pus in the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises in the head of the nose and grows and becomes large until it can be seen; therefore, you must cut it at the beginning, completely excise it, then place the fire cautery or burning medicine on its place; and if one delays covering it while it is still large, beware if it is hard, discolored, insensitive: do not touch it with iron as it is a worsened abscess, because when it is covered once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touching and not discolored, you can completely cover it. The patient empties it and covers it with fear, and cures the place with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when dislocation of a joint occurs in one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, if such a thing happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then press the two lips together with a stitch, heal it as long as it is healthy; and if the lips are already separated from both sides, you must sew up all the parts of their edges until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder and pulverized incense on top; and place a piece of strong or other plaster over the powders and let it dry until it sticks, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in the abdomen stitching; or with thread, as I have explained to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When abscesses on the lips are hard within, similar to grains of wheat, and greater or smaller in size; then you must turn the lips, cut an incision on each side, take it with pincers and crush it in each part; afterwards use vitriol powder over the incision until the blood is stopped; then apply alum and dry cures to heal the wound until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the jaws
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, pusillanimous flesh arises on the jaws that the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with tweezers and cut its root, allowing the pus to flow or the blood; then place vitriol powder or other restricting and drying powders on the spot; and if the pus returns after the incision, as often happens, you should cut it again, and cauterize it: it will not return after the cauterization; and this are the shapes of instruments for covering.
des sordens	Of the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes teeth or gums assemble together near the chin within the mouth between the gums, and they are ugly and rough; sometimes the teeth become black and yellowish and curved until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth smell; you must make the patient sit between your hands and the patient's head should be in your lap, and clean the teeth or the rough spots that appear, as long as nothing remains; and do the same for the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowish and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if one removes the one that is present at the first reason, it is good; if not, you should start again on the second or third day and the patient as long as you have everything cleaned; know that teeth require different forms of instruments to clean them, according to what the work shows, because the instrument used to clean the teeth has other forms than the one used between the teeth; and these forms and others are prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary to wait as long as possible before pulling it out, because this should not be done at all; for this is a very high substance until there is no excuse to remove it with the rasp.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 When the patient is forced to draw [something], you must be certain of the tooth that is coming out.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the patient experiences pain and believes it to be a toothache, and draws out the bad tooth; however, the pain does not go away until all the rotten part is removed, as we have found in saints; and when you are certain that the tooth needs to be extracted, you must gnaw around the tooth at every interval. Use a strong forceps to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or subtle pliers at the very root, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps; and keep the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth correctly, if it does not come out easily, take any of these tools and push it gently from each side, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages where the hole is; and if you hold it subtly with tweezers so it does not break while pulling; and you must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, as this will cause the patient greater pain due to the root more than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware that you do not act like the ignorant knights who in their haste and recklessness sometimes break the cart, and do not bring about what we have said; but sometimes they cause this great disease due to the roots that remain, or because they break the cart as we often see; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or oil and lard; and if blood comes out, which often happens, fill the area with crushed vitriol; and if it does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which often silence the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, which do not bend as you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members that do not yield when pulled, and let them be hard made of iron, and sharpened to hold onto things.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains drawn out, it is necessary that you place on it soft cotton in butter for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 while the limbs are soft, then put the tongs called "algefri," which resemble a pair of pliers, inside and make them like a file and this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", that is known as a probe, which is shaped like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be thick and large so as not to break it, and if the root jumps out through these tools, that's good; if not, help with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if help is given with this instrument having two prongs, which is shaped like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments that are before them in reason of teeth, and of this tool which seems like great pincers, whose shape is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this tool must not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other tools, which are not listed; and the wise masters themselves find their tool by themselves, according to what their work and the disease show, because there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to diversity among them, and if it breaks the cart or other bones, or if it can, then he will search for the tools that are necessary, which I have told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and sturdy to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and remove; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for that, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then use this entire tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not as natural according to the body, and their form is ugly, especially in women, you should know that if a tooth has not grown after the tooth falls out, and it is not in the correct place, it cannot be set or filed; then pull it out; and if it erupts with another tooth, take this instrument whose shape is similar to a small beak, sharp at the end, and made of iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the handle of the file is held with hands for many hours due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small file shaped like this.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently with this small file for many hours, until it stops hurting; then plane it at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and bites the tongue, you must file down its sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth fall out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth close together either by blow or by falling down, and the patient cannot chew on that which he eats but shakes, and you treat them with medicines restraining them, it is of no use; then they must be held back with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never does; and let the gold thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the tongs between the misaligned teeth as many as there are, one or more, until you see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin covering again until you reach the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move; and let your suture at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then insert the heads with a wire into pliers, and assemble them, and place them back between the healthy teeth so that it does not pierce the tongue; then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates or the wires break, hold it in place with another wire; if it stays and serves for its duration, this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two roots, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out and is put back in its place repeatedly as we have said; do not interfere with anyone who is not wise and compassionate, and sometimes the shape of a bone from a cow is used, and it is placed where the tooth is missing, and it is tied up as we have said, and it remains for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Occasionally there is a link that comes under the tongue or by nature, which does not occur naturally; or by accident of a healed wound; and the operation is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head in your hand, lift the tongue; then take hold of the nervous link wide enough so that the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a wound, push the incision and seize it widely; and make sure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done this, lift the area with rosewater and linen, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and keep the patient from healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if bleeding occurs, place vitriol powder on it; and if the wound bleeds again, cauterize it with slow-burning cautery (lentiginout), which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another cure until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see the swelling becoming pale or black or hard and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is a chancre; if it is declining towards blenchor and there is moisture, throw the forceps and use a thin spatula to deliver it from both sides. If it does not heal at your treatment, apply vitriol powder until it heals completely. Then raise the swelling with cold water and vinegar, and cure it with other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes inside the throat come objects called "godath," which are correctly called almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, beware: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of bleeding; but let it be until it turns black, and then you will cut it, or it will break by itself; and if it is white in color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first make sure that the abscess pus has settled down and been soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his shoulder should be placed on a pillow, and open his mouth wide, and the sergeant grasps the tongue between his hands, and presses it down onto the instrument, thus forming this shape; and let it be made of silver or thin brass like scissors.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And you press the tongue to this whole instrument and see the abscess, then take the awl and poke it into the almond, and pull it out upwards more than you can; and pull something from the cloth with it, then hit it on the instrument in this way, which looks like a hammer, and although the head is curved, one end to another, and they are very sharp, it is made of iron or copper.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use pliers of this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	Then take pliers of the following shape: and when you have gripped one of the almonds, grip the other in the same manner, and after incising, pour hot, sharp, and astringent liquids over the wound, and if bleeding occurs, pour more hot liquids or scorched pomegranate skins or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it heals; sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat instead of the two almonds, so grip them as you would the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treat a woman with an abscess that is located within the throat, to be specific, an abscess of small size; and I had tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale due to the blocked passageway, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in this state for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so high that it had been placed two fingers breadths inside the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 Then I immediately stuck an onion into one nostril, then pulled it out, and a large piece of pus followed; next, I stuck the onion again into the other nostrils, opened the mouth, and pressed the tongue; afterwards, I stuck the onion into these abscesses, took a part of it, and nothing but a little blood came out; and thus the conduit of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting off this abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept growing back again, filling the cavity that I had opened, until it became very large; then I tricked it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left these parts, and let God do with them what he would after me.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When the arm descends towards the eye, and it has swollen and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the abscesses are soothed, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and the one that is round and not long; and it is bloody or of pale color or black, then you must make an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger on the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its swelling and length, you must make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument mentioned before; then pierce the onion into the eye, and draw it out, and cut it at the two points that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you not cover excess beyond the natural term; for if you do so more, it harms the voice and speech; and after incision, use what has been said in the incision of the two testicles, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 If the patient fears covering (it), then you must use an engine for the cauterization to alleviate fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient places his head in your lap, and then you press the tongue against the instrument as has been said in the chapter of cautery, and hold it with hot and sharp force, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has hair or a tumor at the eye, apply the medicine with a scoop-shaped spoon, and place the instrument over all of the medicine on the eye; the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine without reaching the throat or nose, then hold your hand over all of the medicine and press it on the eye until you see the swelling and abscesses subsided and the pain caused by the medicine has been alleviated; then take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, insert the instrument into the canal above, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; repeat this process until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to start over with the cauterization of the medicine, restart it and after the cauterization, irrigate around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, clean what is around the medicine; then wash with cold water and treat with gargling until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more subtle than incision, or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calmander and yarrow and origanum and rue and chamomile and savory and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of these in .i. pot, and add ashes, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be .i. hair-like instrument according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it should be silver or iron, and one of the heads pushed into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied; afterwards, it often happens, until the eye dries up; and see that you do not do this at the beginning of the abscess's heat, for many things can happen; and do not do this except when the abscess's heat declines.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a reed and put an eggshell crack in the patient's head so that the mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and it is a good cure combined with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens that bone or a spine of fish or something else gets stuck in the throat, so you must remove what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments until you see movement; if it does not open by itself and remains lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach. Perhaps that will expel the stuck object through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of sponge, a piece of cotton, a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the location, it will stick, and you will draw it out; and if it does not come out due to what we have said, take .i. instrument made of wood according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, as the patient should not push it down or force the bone within; rather, it is better for the patient to push the instrument in, because they are pushed or the matter is loosened; if it is pushed down, or pulled out all the way, it should be equal throughout the length of the instrument until it is removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	and remove the saliva from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the remedy is the snake, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the patient's throat towards the sun, afterwards hold their tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the snake, draw it out with a very small pair of scissors or subtle pliers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that doesn't work, take a heated iron rod and put it in the patient's throat, then push or move the heated iron upwards several times.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And the patient should be kept wet all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a whole glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, then move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the snake feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, anoint the patient with asafoetida in the instrument that I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will heal quickly.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of fumigation is that you take a pot with charcoal inside, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and put the head of the instrument in the opening; then pour your fumigation into it, and the patient places the back of their neck in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes up to the nostrils instead; and now let it stay, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient should endure thirst, eat salted and acidic foods, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out with this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to treat the nose, is such that when it can be seen, resembles curved pincers for entering into the throat; and resembles the nozzle of a syringe, and has an abrasive surface so that what it takes, it cannot lose; and here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many things resembling abscesses are mentioned in this chapter, according to what is recalled here from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that one of them is similar, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for the lungs in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 for abscesses of the head are different from those in the body, and the abscesses caused by the lung are different from those that come in joints, and each should have its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the swelling is measured according to its completion; and if there are those that must be pierced when they are ripe, but do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that come from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when an abscess comes near to joints and is left until it is ripe around, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may rot, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 If the abscess is near the main body of the member and you delay the puncture until it has ripened, it will harm the main member; or if the abscess is near the base, it should be pierced as soon as it has ripened; and you should not puncture an abscess without proper digestion, except when it is near the base, which cannot be pulled out, and is long inside, and there comes a fistula; and it cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of perforation for the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the disappearance of fever, and reduction of pain and redness, and swelling and shrinkage of the abscess head, and other signs; and you should make the perforation site lower than the abscess, and where it has opened up; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, in jointures, at nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no ploughing.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that droop, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in a hard place, it is worth letting the puncture remain until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce before that, the body will be lengthened with its fluid, and it will fill with much filth; and perhaps the lips harden and it becomes deeply infected by it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And you should make small abscesses, small punctures; and large abscesses, large punctures, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to be careful, and cover; when it has become like a linen cloth, and is softened, it is necessary to do as with babies: and if there are those that have been slit into three angles, and if there are those from which one covers like the branch of myrtle, as abscesses in joints; and if there are those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 He who has no head, like an abscess superficial, it should be pierced completely; and when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing improperly; do this repeatedly, slowly, as much as necessary, until the pus is all drawn; likewise, if the patient is of weak vitality, or a woman carrying, or small children, or elderly people decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 Sometimes the pus jolts out with discharge, by chance the patient dies, and you should not worry about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, be extremely careful with this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, squeeze out the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; if it is a large hole, bring threads of linen or old cotton; if it is a big abscess, and there is a lot of pus, you must insert a thread in each one so they come together; if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin and shaved around it, fill it with old cotton or linen dressing without moisture, tie it up until the third day; then open it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and a cloth, wet the cloth, and put it on the place, pressing it several times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the bleeding continues, bring governance and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is during winter, and the place or abscess is very nervous, then you must put hot towels and cloths moistened with wine and oil on top of it; but if it is summer, and the place is fatty, then you must put wet towels and cloths on top of it, or cold ones made of wine and oil, for two days, as we have said; then open the abscess, drain it, and heal it until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses at the head, there are methods that we know of, which are wrapped in cloths, as is the case with a juniper berry, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are fat and such-like ones with moisture, as well as blisters; and there are those that are hard and stony at the edge, and there is no doubt that the arteries do not oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of the cut is that you explore with every instrument that is called "intermissoire", from which the form follows, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 If it contains moisture, they make it through the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape off the skin that contains it, because it returns again if nothing is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if it is available; if not, in water and oil, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and this will heal those that are delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then continue with the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know it does not stay in place; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the abscess is full of pus, squeeze it in this manner, along its length; and throw out your onions, and peel off all its skin, and put all your treatment to draw away the pus where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And do the same with the abscess if it is hard, and cut and treat as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 Cut above the hard abscess and moisturize it, for it will be easier, since there is a little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if in any of these abscesses or head there is no moisture, as was the abscess that I cut open from an old woman's head; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had pierced it with anything, one would have made a wound like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads coming from children's heads and roots of the ears, one should open them always as much as possible, to allow pus to drain; and treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess appears at the neck, under the jawbones, in angles, and sometimes it occurs elsewhere on the body, and they are large and connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 Each scrofula is properly within its side, as the lymph node and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities with these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 Some contain moisture, and some are malicious ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the one that you see with a good disposition on the surface and is similar to the color of the body, silent in all parts and is neither at the neck artery nor the conduit, nor is it hollow; then you must cut through it from above, peel off each part, and put the two ends of the cautery as close as possible to each other, if you have them, as we have said in abscesses of the head; pull it gently and carefully, ensuring that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and be careful not to use a spatula or cut too deeply, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cover what should not be covered.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you go, put vitriol powder into the wound or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound; leave it until the abscess is appeased and the wound becomes soft and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 When the wound has stopped bleeding, return to your work until you are finished; then look for any small scrofula spots and cut them and wash them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 If there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula spot, it is not necessary to cut that scrofula spot at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang down without harm; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment on the wound and heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you sew together the two edges of the wound, because there will be no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 It is necessary that you understand how to cover the root [of something], draw out the pus, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce there where it becomes open; and pierce in such a way as the one mentioned above, on the edge, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things, so that it destroys what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an ointment-infused char cloth until it heals.
de squinance	Inflammation or swelling
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the size of the throat but I never saw anyone do it in our land and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinancy, it is required that the cleft in the throat, called "epiglottis", be opened; and no aid should be given by these (people), for all the veins and the pormon of the sickness are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two amandres (tonsils).
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pormon (throat), it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation that comes from the swelling.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it below three circles or four small incisions across, between the second and third circles or according to the size of the incision, not in the cartilage; and such places are suitable for cutting the epiglottis that there is no cartilage present, and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat all along, then cuts the keyhole as long as it reaches the chin; and avoids the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then severs the cartilage, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the trachea that jumps through the broken place, and by the lack of voice; and leaves the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed in which there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and sew it up entirely through the cartilage; then administer medications that cause healing until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi said that one should not do this until the throat is entirely stopped up, and the patient is pronounced dead, and his soul departs.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Therefore, press on the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason, the old would command to keep the wound open as long as the malice of the disease has passed, which passes in 3 or 4 days. And then they would command to sew up the wound and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 A young girl took the knife and stabbed herself in her throat, piercing part of the windpipe; I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found blood coming from it, and knew that neither vein nor artery had burst, but the blood was flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastily sewed up the wound and healed it until she was well; nothing bad happened to the girl but her voice became hoarse, and she returned to her condition; for this reason, I say that in such a case of the epiglottis, have no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess with a yellowish color, and it is predominantly in women; and it is of two kinds: natural and accidental; where the natural one has no device.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 The accidental one is also of two kinds: the first kind resembles a fat pouch, and the second kind resembles an abscess that comes from an artery; there should be caution, and it should not be forced except in the case of small ones, and it must be thoroughly examined: if you find it like a fat pouch, and it is not opening at all, if you press it, as one presses fingers, and draw it to its full length, if there is any, and enclose it well, and cure it as necessary, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	From us (meaning the medical practitioners)
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways of ours are, which I shall tell you all their similarities; and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference between notch and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is heat and fever persisting, until the eruptions have passed, and the boils have matured; then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 A notch has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the site, which is its own sac and is in accordance with the color of the body, and begins as a blister and becomes large; and there are two similarities, either fat or moist, and it is often colored as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the newt, that you examine and test first all the equipment called "entromissoire", according to its shape or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 The method of the incision of abscesses in our ways is that you take or more moist place than you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers bit by bit until you feel that the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess; then draw out the contents, but beware that it does not burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs out from the abscess, let it be colored as I said for other abscesses; and if afterwards no moisture comes out at the opening, know that it is filled with pus, then make a cross incision, take hold of it with forceps, peel it gently on both sides and pull the skin where it lies carefully to remove it safely; if you cannot remove it safely, then remove it in pieces so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains, the pus returns many times; if a little remains and it does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound closed with hot things that ease abscesses, treat it with other remedies until it heals; if the abscess is large, cut it in two, treat the wound with what cures sores.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the veins are bleeding or other similar cases, use crushed vitriol and let it lie for 2 to 4 days until the wound dries up, allowing the blood vessels to heal; then return to bandaging that which remains unhealed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Behold the shapes of the stirrups, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small; and there are three squares among them which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are also three types: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses with fistula; and they are similar to needles used for sewing violets, and they are made of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and those with black handles are more experienced in encircling the corners of fistula; and they are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of the cones are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and some cones have two bends in three ways; and some cones have three bends and are also of three types; and some cones have two bends, and cones with a single bend only, and they are also of three types; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The tips of these [things] are sharp and those that do not cut only from one side, from which we scrape the nerves, for this reason so as not to hit the vein or nerve; and these intromissoires are replied in many ways, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you see; and none are used except for charnut [charred] places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and genitals, and similar places; and sometimes another instrument is used, resembling fistula scissors, according to this shape, for draining blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed at the site where the vein or artery bleeds, and sometimes they return according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them must do so according to this form from this line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape the fat, apply medicine to the wound in a soothing way, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals; and if the breast tilts downwards and is deformed due to its size, as happens with women, make it into two folds above, by two similar cuts; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line b to the line g; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, remove the fat, and bring in what we have said about stitches and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it heals; and if it does not heal, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remaining fat and the wound, then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses from the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	these abscesses coming from the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas, or they have coats containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole cavity in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofulas, make them as we have said in cutting into scrofulas, and if it swells, apply fire cure as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	For the cutting of an artery...
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is wide and the skin above it is joined, it often occurs that abscesses develop, and the same thing happens with a swollen vein and an abscess; and if one recognizes it by the artery, the abscess extends deep within; and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels constricted; and when it is a vein, it swells and appears round; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is below the joints and at the angles and near the neck and in many other places, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, you must remove the iron cure and also the one at the head should be removed, and in the one who is swollen from an artery, make a cut through the skin along its length; then open the incision carefully and separate the artery from the tendons, as long as it is exposed; then insert an awl beneath it and pierce it up to the other side and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then press the area between the two tendons with an introducer until the blood stops flowing and the abscess is drained; then apply the cure that will stop bleeding, until the tendon heals; then treat the area with ointment as appropriate, until it is healthy; if the abscess is from the vein opening, you must dye your hand with what you can of the abscess along the entire skin, then insert an awl beneath the area that you hold in your hand, pierce it and have a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or the tendon of one of the two sides with threads; if you doubt that the threads will not protrude, insert another awl along the entire length of the abscess at the incision of the first awl and tie the threads in four places; then press the abscess until the excess is expelled, then press the excess fat and leave what is tied; then put a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply cures of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and the vein, so they come to nerves when they are struck or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this happens more often in shoulders and fingers and all joints where there are joints, and it is the greatest abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is found in many positions with pain; and when it is forced outwards, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely within the body, but under the skin; and it is silent all over, and does not go neither forwards nor backwards, neither up nor down, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: by accident it may contract; and he who is on the head or on the forehead, let the skin be scraped with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike at its root; if it is large, suspend it on a lance and peel it off, then open and clean the wound and stitch it together until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	hanging large lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; and there are small and very large ones; I have seen people who had two bellies that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a narrow root, and were split open, and continually oozed moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut and found in one 18 pounds weight, and in the other 6 pounds, and the openings in the incision were such that you could see if the patient was moist, and the color of the arterial blood was white and moist with a thin root; if it is chopped at a large spatula, let there be fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For at the thigh there often comes excessive bleeding, and if it floods, then you hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take a fine thread made of yarn, tie the ligature as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the thread of yarn until it stops the bleeding, and causes pain; and if the roots are large, be cautious when covering because of the stomach, but you can well cover half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and take care not to cover the knot which is of dark color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess swollen, and I will come to the treatment of this scrofula later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of boils comes from cautery of a wound or a cut in the scrotum, as it happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries as described before, or from wind; and if it is through the route of the scrotum and through the exit of the testicle, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, it is a light thing without pain, and has an open exit of diverse exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the outflow of the intestine, then it is more varied; and when pressed with the fingers, it sinks in, and then returns, and by chance if it is sutured, it increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is light and easily pressed with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to wind, it is soothing to touch, and the operations require that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary to let the healing take place.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, you must instruct the patient to take hold of his anus, stretch it out straight, then sign all around the fecal matter; then command him to grasp it between your hands, then go around the area that you have signed with a spatula, then extend half of the abscess above the great spoon; then sew it around with a strong thread or cord made from strong silk firmly, and leave the sutures loose; then open half of the extended abscess over the suture, and insert your index finger, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught in the suture, unsew it, remove the intestine out of the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, take it with the spoon, and empty its superfluity; and if the artery opposes or the vein does, go around carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, insert four threaded filaments into them, and insert them around what you have made in a cross shape that you are piercing; then hold the abscess open with four leagues above the needles, and if you see any holes, remove the needles, and leave the area until it becomes dry, then cut off the dead flesh as necessary, and cure it as previously described; and drain any blood or moisture that you find, then cure the area.
dou chancre	two boils
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the similarities of boils, and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should choose the cure of iron; and we shall say what a boil is like, and great caution in its care, and the ancients said that when boils are in a place where they can be shaved like boils that are on mamels, and in the thigh, and similar places, it should all be removed when it begins; and when it is large and old, it is not advisable to approach it, for I never knew anyone heal one; no one ever healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him urinate if there is manifest retention, then cut open one boil to perform the operation; then pour your onions or boils, and shave the head of all parts, and remove everything without leaving anything; let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or something else, and if the flow of blood makes you against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is cauterized; then cure it with another treatment until it heals.
de ydropisie	From hydropisy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division that the resemblances of edema are similar to idropisie; and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs for each resemblance, and the treatment using medicines, and the one that is treated with iron: these are only blisters; no iron should be used in these two resemblances, namely tympanites and iposarche, because it is a deadly thing; therefore, when you treat this edema resemblance called "blisters" using medicines, and the treatment does not improve, observe if the patient is weak or has other diseases besides edema, such as abdominal swelling and similar things; do not use iron in that case because there is doubt; and if you see the patient strong and he only has edema, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed like this: lift the patient upright onto your hands, and let the minister press his abdomen pushing water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the pointed spatula as shown below:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be incised through two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And let it be incised no deeper than it can reach up to the intestines when pushed in, and not pierce through; then check if the bile duct is connected towards the intestines: if so, you must cut above the third rib on the left side; and if it is due to liver disease, the incision should be to the left of the third rib; and if it is due to stone, it should be to the right, and the patient should not lie down on the incision so that excess fluids do not run into that weak area; then pierce the skin with the instrument, and push it in, and place your hand at the tip of the spatula as much as the thickness of a nail or more; then pierce the spatula until it reaches the level of eight, which is the bile duct, and pull it out, and push this instrument in the position shown:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a silver needle, thin and made of thread or light wire, and has a small pointed tip; and on one side, three points; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the head is shaped like a quill pen, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make with a pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 On the handle above is the anguilliforme, so that when the instrument comes to the marrow, then press now on the instrument; empty it out then in the area that you should, for if you empty it too much at that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon or he falls down or approaches death; but empty according to its strength and as the patient's condition and pulse indicate; then take the instrument and stop the marrow, and it is held now by the caution that stops the perforation which is above the siphon, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then return the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small amount of marrow; do this every day and be careful not to wait too long but only a little marrow.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt about the patient and let him have much water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and with much sweating or bathing in the sun, and anoint him with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born who have no foreskin or the foreskin is small or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary to pierce the spittle very thinly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then place the thin foreskin of pine wood over it and bind it and keep it like that for three or four days until he wants to urinate, then remove the foreskin, let him urinate, and then put it back; and it is not necessary in this case because the urine that comes out does not leave the foreskin closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 The patient whose ulcer is small, is treated with a poultice of linen, as we have said, it will open up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the ulcer in their place are bled, for no one is born whose ulcer is at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate due to the material that cannot reach the marris (the opening of the urethra), and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of work is that the patient lies on his back, his penis and scrotum should be exposed as much as possible, so that the foreskin can be pulled out as much as necessary; and take care to avoid bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a bandage to stop the bleeding and cure the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this albath comes in the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly genitals; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you must take them once a week with a subtly thin instrument, scrape and clean them all, then put soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then cure them with diaphinicon ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, with pus-like color and odor, you should apply a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have burned it (the ulcer), and if the ulcer is on the penis and has both parts inside the skin and outside, you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed outside, heal it inside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you treat it together, the testicles of the penis are not always certain to not be pierced, and darkness and corruption appear in its length and around it; then it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which should be made from pomegranate rind and wheat, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding comes out, bring the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cauteries aid in the following way: for bleeding and corruption; and if the testicles of the penis are corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to bring or administer a catheter from the penis, and make the patient urinate; and when the hairs reach the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary to shave it with an instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the testicles of the penis are released from all sides; and if this is a difficult thing to discuss, then it is necessary to shave it with a spatula at any point along the penis and the pubic hair; then press together well, and put a thin linen cloth dampened in cold water between them so that they do not touch again.
de la circoncision	circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the discontinuation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work according to our will and specifically on children, it is necessary that we perform the best and most delicate work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have it only because we acquired it through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greatest part of masters and healers who performed circumcision around one day, and for adults and novices; however, it is dangerous because there are two layers, and in case one above is cut and left the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now cover it with copper, and the pain is doubled; and at the amputation which is deep near the limb, the point of the knife may slip, spoiling the work, and many times it does not require amputation and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In the amputation which is performed I have found the advantage of using wire in that the wires cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, you should make an equal cut all through it; but the blade should be well straightened around the skin; and the method of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not pierce him except to tie the thread around the rod only, and afterwards let him enjoy in every possible way that you can; then make it lie straight between your hands, and tighten the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see, nor any instrument; then push your hand against the rod and blow or cut, and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the ligature with a double thread, then tie the other end to another ligament; and hold it by the second ligature at the thumb and the index finger, and strike between the two ligaments, then draw the knot quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow freely, for that is the pus; and put powder on it and on the powder apply egg white stirred with a well-cooked rose water, and let it stay until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and they should be as large as the thumb equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundification is when the kidneys are incised within; therefore, you should stretch it with your fingernail, so that the incision becomes an abscess; and equalize it, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, take tweezers, and then equalize.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If they exceed three days, and that which is beneath the spermatic cord swells, let it be left until the abscesses calm down, and gently incise it; and equalize it as you can move it, and take care of the part of the spermatic cord, it will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb of things submerged in a wound with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if it is equalized too much, it will go upwards, but it will not harm; then cure it as we have said, until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is caused by a stone, frozen blood, a boil, pus, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone lodged in the bladder neck, then the patient should be bent over his knees; and the feet should be placed on the back, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and then the bladder neck is compressed to express the stone above, so that the urine is relieved; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form: and it should be made of subtle silver, light cylinder shaped, like a bird's feather; and the cannula should be one and a half palms long, and it should be subtle at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the method of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, tie it to the head of a cotton or wool swab, and push the head of the thread into the syringe; cut off the excess of the swab and push it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on a chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with oil moistened with warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis over towards the abdomen; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and make the patient feel as though they are urinating into an empty vessel, and this is not done according to this order unless the conduit through which it flows is twisted; then tie the thread all along the swab and the urine follows the swab, then extract it forcefully, and correct the urine; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When sores or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and if it has three openings: two of one side, and one of another, as you see; and the lews cheeks are such that the medicines should be so soft that they stop the worm without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you wish to throw your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the cestrum in the moisture, and draw along with it; if you draw out the moisture with the cestrum, and then forcefully push it back along; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clisterm which they use to clisterize the bladder: here it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is raised higher; and below the breast or the shoulders fall down; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you have prepared to cleanse the bladder; then fold it between two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat the moistened part over the fire; then insert the head of the clistere into the wound, then hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture coming out; until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the wound; and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, puncture it roundly; then push a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like a thimble, fill it with oil, water, and moisture, and put it in the instrument; do as you have done with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the wound.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the methods of stone and its extraction with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone implanted in the eye and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate according to size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the stone leaps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it opens holes, and burns the patient's urinary organ, pierces it many times, and then ties it up; and from these leaps the foundation weakens; and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, but it is very severe in the elderly, and it is between middle age and old age for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes hinders the seeking of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet and push downwards and move them towards underneath, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes rises up a little; then make him sit between your hands arranged, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downward; then press and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall by touching all over, you should anoint your hand with oil from the left, if the patient is weak, or heat it, if the patient is fully grown; and push it into its foundation, seeking for the stone, and when you feel it with your hand, remove it at the neck of the bladder; then press up on it and push it out where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the servant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the muscles in the area where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And between what is between the coccyx and the foundation, do not touch the middle but the left side of the navel; it should be straight above the stone, and your hand should be in place or at the foundation, and it should be carved through the middle so that it is wide by the exit, and narrow inside according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance, the pressure on the hand that is at the foundation may cause it to jump out with effort; and know that there are many stones or angles and margins: if it is smooth to remove; and if it is soft, like a plum and round, the exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 To the one who has angles and swelling, make an incision larger; if it does not open by itself, you must force it with pliers resembling a chisel at the head, to press the stone so that it doesn't escape; or push underneath using a subtle crooked probe at the head. If you cannot manipulate it in this way, enlarge the hole slightly and use vitriol if necessary. And if there are more than one stones, push out the largest first near the bladder, then strike downwards, pull it out, and the smaller ones afterward if there are any more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, you must make a larger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For the sick person, there are two things that happen: either he dies, or urine comes out repeatedly because the wounds cannot heal; but you must still try to drain it, or break it with pliers, as long as you can do so in pieces; and when you have finished your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and cover it with a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and cold water and cold rosewater, to cool the abscess; then make the patient lie down on his neck, and do not undo the binding until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you undo it, immerse the place well in oil and water, then treat it with healing ointment of diaphanicum and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 If abscesses and corrosions occur in the wound and the blood congeals in the bladder, and the urine is retained in this way so that it does not flow with the urine: then boil your foot in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will rot and perforate; then clean the wound with water, oil, and linen, and help it in all possible ways until it heals; and it is necessary that every hour you treat it, you tie his legs together, and gather the medicines on the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it is guided by a rod and thrust into, and urine cannot be released; cure it as I say next, you should cut it many times, except that you are excused from cutting due to this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proved it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron foret in the form of this figure and pointed at four angles into one taper:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take thread and tie it around the rod under the stone so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the awl gently into the rod until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl little by little in the stone, as much as you can pierce the stone from another side; soon urine will come out, then press your hand on what is still held inside the stone that is within the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is ever broken and jumps with urine, the patient recovers; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, put thread under the stone and another above, then insert a probe towards the stone between two veins, pull it out, release the sinew, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	from the female's stone (meaning ovarian cyst)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens rarely that a stone should be in a woman's womb, and if it ever happens, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for four reasons: the first is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to reveal herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 The third method is that by chance you cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the woman's stone is deeper than a man's, so it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear. If such necessity arises, then you must take a skilled midwife, even if she is difficult to find, and if one cannot be found, do not hesitate to use a subtle cast; present a wise woman as bail or one who knows a part of the art, and command her to perform the incision of the stone. Ensure that the woman is a virgin; then she must push down with her fist or base and search for the stone; if she finds it, she should constrain it under her fist, and you must command her to push her fist or hand into the patient, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is found, it must be moved slowly and steadily from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone in the root of the thigh near the middle of the bone where movement occurs, so that the stone can be felt in that part; and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and it should be cut off at the first small piece; then push the finger into the incision, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound so that the stone can pass through easily, and know that there are many types of stones: for example, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 Recognize the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 If the wound opens again, place broken vitriol on it and hold for an hour until the wound stops bleeding; then return to your work until the stone is expelled, and have instruments as I said for helping you extract the stone from men; and if the wound opens again, and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the place and bind with straps and bandages, do not start it again, leave the stone and do not draw it out, for there is a chance the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is abated and the wound heals, return to your work, and extract the stone when it protrudes.
de hernie carnouse	of a soft hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white chyle, which is beneath the curd of the kidneys, containing the egg; and it is called "chyle", and sometimes it is properly in the egg's membrane, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the kidney between the white chyle that we have said; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this aquouse is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes there comes percussion on the head, and this moisture has many colors: either it declines to yellow, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often; and these are signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white like we have said, it is a sign of abscesses, which grow long as the figure of an egg, and do not open the head, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the very cloth [linen], then it is considered an abscess with part of the egg; and since the moisture is between the skin and the white albumin, one can feel it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe thoroughly for its form, which has been described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intrusion, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we cure with iron, the patient should be cleansed to our power and his body's fullness; then have him lie on his back, upon something a little raised, and put lots of cloths beneath him; then sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit at the right, and stretch out the rod to one of the two ribs near the shoulder; then take the leech, and cut the skin between them with it along its length up to the joint, and your incision should be completely straight in dividing the skin as far as the white albumin; then carefully scrape off the subcutaneous fat according to your power; then pierce the albumin all around with a large needle, and draw out all the liquid, and then put your onions [tampons], and suture the albumin; do not touch the joint, but only the albumin; cut everything or in pieces carefully so that you do not return the liquid; if the egg bursts from your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the procedure for the abscess; then join the two leaves of the joint at a suture, then treat the wound as with other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to break the vessels that are susceptible to bleeding, doubting the flow of blood; then strike the coccyx at the entire suspension and extract the egg, and heal as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if an ulcer is assembled into two parts together, know that these are the branches; if you strike the other part as you have done the first equally, then draw out the blood, and put dampened linen in oil of roses in the wound; and put other dampened linen in wine and oil, and put them on both sides, and put cloths doubled over on top, and tie it all with a rope according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take the two cloths and use linen strips in this way and sew them together into a collar around the wound, and one of the heads takes hold of the base up to the back, and the other at the handle part; and the other two heads are on either side, and the rest should be drawn together at the knot of the bandage; and sometimes this branch of cautery is used in place of iron surgery, and it involves taking a sharp cauterizing tool, striking the skin of the wound, and heating it as we have said so that the white pus that contains the ulcer is exposed; then take the cautery in this shape, and pierce the pus with small holes, and scrape off the pus with this hot cauterizing tool:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the blow in every manner that you can, as long as you are heating everything; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salveable; and be mindful of the management of blood, and mindful of the works of incision; and if anything happens contrary to this, or abscess chafing or bleeding or something else, then cure what happens contrary to this, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 If the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its horribleness, then perform perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the aphrosis is present, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then perforate the abscess in the area below entirely with a spatula wide, and place the perforation along the length of the body; let the holes be large so that all the pus can flow out; then put cotton over the area, hold it in place, and allow the remaining pus to drain out, then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not prevent the pus from coming out of the opening of the wound, then you must insert a reed or the instrument used to treat the pus of dropsy, as its shape has been described earlier; and enlarge the hole in the wound, and know that the pus returns, and is collected after six months or so, and when it is collected as before, then the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess on the cheek
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the section of this remedy there is fear in many positions, so it seems that one should use more [of it]; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, and especially in the head; and this is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 This is about excessive sour and acute moisture spread to the joints or from impact; and the color of the abscess according to the body's color; it does not hurt, but is a serious abscess; and sometimes an abscess becomes swollen and hard, and of such a color, and occasionally comes from the artery or vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it comes from the artery, it can be recognized by the abscess's hot position when you press on it; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 The patient who has swelling of the neck is known by his disposition at the expression of the touch of the fingers, and can well perform the incision on this appearance, and on other things; it is that you cut the cartilage of the throat, then is the egg in the head, and the yolk runs out white and clear, and delivers the suspensory from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the egg is already soft with these things born, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and crush it; and if it is towards the white or in that which is within the vessels, it is necessary that you deliver all that tender part and crush it.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the hatchling is on its left side, you must break it completely and pull out the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with damp wool in oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess on the cheek
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enclosed by a cover resembling a boil, with the softening of the throat, and the patient groans heavily as he goes; and the cure for this disease is in great danger as above, and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then you place the suspensory bandage below the knees at your elbows, around all the vessels near the penis, and tighten them with a master; then stretch them out fully; then cut through the foreskin sharply wide from the root of the penis, until they are exposed, and then flay it on each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples; then insert a double-threaded needle where the vein has appeared, and tie it to the first joint where the vision is present, and tie it directly to the other end; then pierce them evenly, according to the length of the body, and remove any corrupt tissues; then treat the wound as one would an arrow wound, so that no vessels leak the blood from the foreskin; because there is no harm in this, and if all the vessels have vision, you must draw the foreskin over all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the sifac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The occurrences of this condition are due to the section that opens or extends on the abdomen in the area of the inguinal region, as a result of which the intestines descend from that incision towards one of the kidneys; and this incision is either the opening or the extension of it, and these two types of conditions occur for various reasons: either by impact, or by jump, or by fall, or by lifting of heavy objects, and similar things; and the signs when it is the extension of the inguinal region, are that it happens little by little over a long period, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the fully developed stage because the inguinal region follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the intestines, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin close by, and this is due to the discharge of the intestines and the body expelling the contents of the intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are expelled through the anus, and they are retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which it is necessary to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull out the intestine with their hand inside through the wound if it can be reached; then hold their neck between your hands, and lift the thighs; then cut the skin over the kidneys longwise; then push fingers into the groin openings according to what is necessary for opening the wound, making sure that the testicles can come out; then remove the peritoneum that is below the skin of the kidneys, until the white peritoneum becomes exposed on all sides; then insert your index finger in the place where the kidney is, in the place that is between the white peritoneum that is below the skin of the abdomen and the second layer of peritoneum, and remove what is behind the abdomen and between the second layer of peritoneum; then move your hand to the right inside the kidney area, and move the white peritoneum up towards your left hand, and lift the abdomen towards the wound; instruct the assistant to stretch the abdomen upward, and untie what is in front behind the ligament; look for any intestine or hardened peritoneum with your fingers, and if you find anything, push it into the abdominal cavity; then take a large needle with thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the peritoneum, which is after the skin of the kidneys; after the abdomen, then sew the edges that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then arrange them in the shape of a cross and sew the peritoneum, as we have said is below the skin of the kidneys, with a strong ligature of two parts; then wrap the edges of the threads, and sew them together with two parts, so that no servants who feed it can enter it, unless an infected cow comes to it; and tie again the ligature according to the first ligature length of two fingers of that one, and after these two ligatures leave a large space below the kidney area as before described; then sew in the rounded part where the abdomen is, then sew in the part below the skin of the kidneys until it becomes smooth and rounded, as we have said earlier; then apply oil-soaked linen to the wounds, and apply the ligature that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes white boils are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For this often happens and leave the ligament until it shrinks by itself; and if it delays in falling off, you should soak with hot water and place on it what has been said, until it falls off; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a soft hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone who dared to make a cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a graft which is attached to the bone, in this manner you tie the veins, above the wound lightly on the underside; then cut in the middle and treat the abscess from those who are working on it, until the veins fall off; and treat it as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Sometimes comes gangrene in the anus, as we have said, and do not touch any of the intestines to the wound; if some are touched, it is a mistake, and repair every hour; and still if it stays too long in this place, the wound or pus forms, until the intestines come out; and this happens by the spreading of pus which is in the anus, as we have said, because it spreads, then it becomes softened and inflamed the anus and opens; and it is treated by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut the swollen anus open widely according to the size of 3 fingers; and then extract the pus which is below the skin that surrounds it, then take the lancet and place it on the visible pus area; and press fully on the stomach, then sew the two visible areas of the pus on top of the tip of the lancet, and sew one and the other; then extract the tip of the lancet, but do not cover or stretch the wound or anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the graft of the intestines; then treat it by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cauterize the hairs (or veins), if it becomes inflamed and cures the wound, do so until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sutures are confined and have no appearance in the wound, and cauterizations are more appropriate here and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin around the eyes is softened in some men, because the charms inside are softened and there is a discharge to be seen; and it is necessary, when it is seen that it needs to be cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to strike the softened skin on the natural skin; then to bring together the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, sew first the excess of the softened skin with 3 or 4 stitches firmly; then to strike between the stitches, and let the cure as for other wounds, until it is healed, and bind the thread.
dou chastrement	of the pounding
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 I mention here that castration is discussed in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary for only two reasons: the first is that animals respond when asked about castration and their cure; and the second, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, pigs, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Therefore, castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the method of castration by attraction, we seat the animal in warm water until the genitals are softened and relaxed; then we grab them with our hand, holding them until they remain and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the branding of the cattle: you must dye the beast, then press the hide of the testicles with your left hand, tie the suspensory, and strike each one with a hot iron where you have well scorched it; leave any small spot unscorched and the subtle scourge that is on the vassels; and this kind of branding is more effective than the one made by attraction, because by attraction, something from the testicles may remain accidentally, which makes the beast desire lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodite
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism is according to two manners in humans: one is that between the two testicles remains open as the figure of a woman's genitalia according to the nature, where it has hair, and sometimes in court they pass urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other method is in women, and it has above the thumbnail as thick as a rod and they prick.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment of men and women is that you cut all the hemorrhoids together, and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the tentergen (or tending)
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Tumor (Tentigene) is a hemorrhoid on the natural part that is too unsightly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and this is treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary that you color the superfluity of the tumor (Tentigene) with your hand or onions, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep, so that blood does not flow out, then treat it with other treatments until it becomes healed; and for another hemorrhoid that comes from the mouth of the vagina, and pus flows out, and resembles a cow, therefore they called it "disease cow" by the ancients.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary to cut it (the shoulder), as we have said previously, and to care for it until it heals.
de erratique	Of the hernia (or protrusion)
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 The hernia is one of three types: when the nature of the woman is not perceived or the opening is small; it is natural by birth or accidental due to disease; or it is caused by hard or subtle pressure, and is made complete in the womb, in the flanks, or in the lower abdomen, wherever it may be; and it should be distinguished from conceiving, childbirth, and from flowers developing; and its recognition is through the examination of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling appears near the hand or the armpit.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is a subtle case and the patient is near death, hurry up and proceed like this: put your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart; then form the two shoulders round when the subtle case is hard, and be careful about the discharge; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the shoulder, and make the woman lie still every day so that it does not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the case is hard and large, you must cut it with a flat instrument resembling the leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the discharge is of watery nature, suspend it on an onion and cut; have the medicines ready that are strengthening blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with many eggs; then bring a large bandage, so that the wound does not heal; and in this way let it be long and provide a dry linen tent; then cure other diseases until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a child is born in marriage, it should be covered according to this manner, unless the birth is an abscess enlarged.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For at the abscess enlarged in marriage, one should not make any attempt to treat it with fire.
des emorroides	If the nature of a woman is not perceived or it is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes about; or it is by false conception, or due to subtle or thick sperm, and it is fully formed in the anus, or in the side, or under the ribs, or wherever it may be; and they cannot conceive, give birth, or bring forth flowers; and knowledge of this is by the observation of the belly. If the efflux of blood is nearby, whether at your hand or at your right side. If it is subtle sperm, and it is nearby the two leeks (testicles), hurry and proceed thus: put your two hands together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread; then form the two leeks, until the subtle sperm is ripe, and the efflux of blood stops. Then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it over the area. Let the woman lie down on her back each day so that it cannot heal. And if the sperm is hard and thick, it should be cut with a spatula shaped like the leaf of myrtle. If the efflux is of false conception, let it stop at the cervix and cut it; and have medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg white. Then prepare a large reed-like straw, so that the wound cannot heal; and in this way it should be kept long, and prepare a tent of dry linen; then cure as necessary until it is healed. And when false conception comes in marriage, it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscess has become hardened. For an abscessed area that has become hardened in marriage, one should not try to heal it.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without care commonly occur, and when hemorrhoids become old they become inflamed; and we have said in the division the similarities, signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and inflammations, when they are completely in marriage and do not appear to sensation, should not be cured by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are at the mouth of the vagina, one can feel them, these are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then set the instrument for tweezers, and place it on its roots, then sprinkle medicinal powders that restrict blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood powder and incense, and similar things; then press her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in a cold bath; and if blood flow comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark, apple tree bark, ivy and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 If it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If it does not, make her wear mustard plasters on the back and around the breasts without wounding them; then take flax, wet it in juice of plantain or elder with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess settles down, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, resembling a rough crust, if necessary cover it as I have said in the previous text; and then continue to heal it until it is well.
des apostemes de la marris	3. When abscesses in the anus are treated...
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscess come in marriage, such as carbuncles and painful abscesses, herpes, scabs, festering ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, I must explain in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not like those that stick to the bowels; and if you wish to know about ironwork, see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hurry to pierce, but let it heal as the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on a chair, or two small chairs where he leans, and support his back and assemble his feet at the parts away from the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a strong rope; then bring the key towards the right side, and lead in the instrument used to open the bladder, so that the form follows; it is necessary that when you see the instrument brought in, you poke the right first to know the depth of the bladder, so that nothing inside comes out more deeply than it should, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the bladder with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it must place the horn of the instrument above, and mark the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess is opened and it is treated by hand, you should cover it with lard oil; and when the boil is empty, you must put moistened linen in oil rose or green dry oil into the wound; place the linen bandage from the wound to the full length of the arm, and place it on top of the arm and over the clean linen bandage soaked with vinegar or honey; then treat it for two days after that with ointment until it is healed; and sometimes lift the arm and the wound with vinegar and honey enema, and then with vinegar or roots of lilies and aristolochia longa boiled; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed in the marrow, you must be careful not to burn with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 Firstly, the woman must recognize the shape of natural childbirth and its signs when she is close to giving birth, and desires to urinate: then hasten the infant to be born; afterward, know that this delivery is according to natural shape, and the child exits with his head, followed by the placenta; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her abdomen, so that the infant comes quickly; for when it moves towards the head, the placenta follows, and the membranes are expelled from their waste products through good purification; and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 It sometimes happens that one falls on one's feet, the body or shoulders, hands, or belly, and it happens to turn by chance around the neck, and in other bad ways; therefore, it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and skilled in these matters, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out naturally from its head and the woman gives birth loudly, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have other women hold her; anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the baile between her fingers using the little spatula as shown below:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And split the second bone, and strike its nail where the moisture that is within is driven out; and hold the woman's belly until the baby comes out, and if it does not come out, you must cleanse the woman with musk of fenugreek with camomile oil; then make her take and vomit from condisi, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now the baby will be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out, you must carefully set them back in place bit by bit; and if they cannot be put back, place the woman on the stool, and lift her feet up high; then tilt the stool onto the ground, and tie the woman so she does not shake with it; and if the hands still cannot be put back and the child is dead, cut the hands with the knife that is placed here before, extract the child, and set them back in place as well.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 from the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out on its feet, you must lift it up; then turn it bit by bit until it is even; then take one of the feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 It may jump up to the hinges, if commanded to strike, and make it vomit with convulsions; if it jumps away, let it be as God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, then turn it slowly, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	And then turn it gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come out as we have said, then take the mussel from a high place, oil of sesame, and softened gum, and grind all in a mortar; put this ointment inside her, and turn her upside down; and when she is softened below, apply the collyrium of myrrh, and put it under, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on the chair, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and press lightly on her stomach because the infant jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the birth of the child on its thighs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, place the belly's edge on his hands, palm to palm; then lay him on his back and let his feet hang down, and he should be lying on the bed; bend your hands, palm to palm, and then take hold of his hands above his stomach, and break the hips bones beneath until it is prepared below; if the child does not leap, grasp its feet and move them forward, then move its stomach upwards, then place your hands; rock the child gently from side to side; and command the woman to catch the child as soon as it comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the child coming out with a wide hand stretch.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to devise a way to return the hand: if you cannot return it, raise the woman and walk; if she cannot walk, make her sit on the bed, spread her legs widely apart; then bring the mustard plaster that I have mentioned earlier; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, and try to return the hand naturally; and deliver the child according to its natural shape, and make her vomit, and command her to catch the child as soon as it comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Hold the baby by its neck, spread your hands wide, and turn your face toward the mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 You must have the servant grip his hand, then twist it little by little and gently; and when it is equalized, you put above it the muscle-healing balm of alum and oil, as we have said, then you command that it move little by little; and when you have done this, make him sit on the seat, and command him to take hold of it; and make him vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, treat the second one as well.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When the afterbirth comes in this way entirely, you strike the afterbirth with your nail until it is voided; and if the child presses on its face and neck, you strike from below so that it is not held, and the child dies; then push the child down, as needed, and command the woman to take hold of it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the birth of twins,   (Note: In medieval medicine, "twins" was used to refer to any kind of duality or pairing, not necessarily two human babies.)
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born frequently, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange, and it often happens.   (Note: This text uses the medieval counting system where Roman numerals are used for numbers greater than one.)
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 Two are strange things that do not live, unless they are named; I know what they are, as they are multiplied, and are sought by the one who devises them, who is linked to filth; and sometimes they arise naturally like all undergrowth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 If they arise forcefully, then the cure is as we have said, and let it be handled by a skilled person, and do promptly and lightly whatever it does; and do in such a way that it moves towards healing.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb in the first month or second month or third month or fourth month or fifth month, or up to the fifteenth, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of a sage man; and it is necessary that the skilled person knows this, for by chance similar things may happen; do accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you cure a woman of a dead child or an unborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out naturally, and you are forced to work by hand; then you must know if the woman is of good virtue and has no accident or fear of death; the woman should lie on her back with her hips inclined downwards and legs raised; and the minister should hold her thighs in two parts, or tie her to the bed so she is not treated from below the child; then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with musk and fennel seed and linseed; then oil the hands of the minister with these oils and these musks; then gently insert them into the mother, then seek where the membranes are located that can be reached, and make sure the fetus is exposed at its head; then pierce the membranes in her womb or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the vagina or near the sides, and if the piercing is on the feet, pierce or poke them and press on the middle ribs; and the minister must hold the membrane with his right hand, and place the thumb between his left-hand fingers, and gently push it anywhere where we have said, until it reaches an empty state; and this is the shape of the membrane:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then pierce towards the other joint, or the one you need to use for extraction, so that the dislocations are even; and then align it equally by moving from one side to another, causing movement to occur, and keep the joints closed for movement, as shown in the figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If there remains a part of it, then press some oil from his fingers onto that part and push it into the remaining part; and if there is no part left, then place the joint where it belongs or higher up, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to the tightness, you must wrap it up in a cloth until it slips out; then crush it at the joint of the foot or near the bone, and do this with both hands and feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the birth canal, or it has a pointed crown assembled, you must push the spiked spatumile between your hands, and break the crown and extract the water; or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape of the instruments or chapter that follows this comes; and do the same with the child if it comes out naturally with a large head; then pull the bones apart with the pliers, and if the child jumps out and is held back by force, it should be cut, as far as the moisture that is in the wrong place goes; and if it cannot come out, you should hit it into pieces where you can. And if it swells in the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture escapes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on its feet, the drawing out is light, and the correction towards the mouth of the bladder is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is protruding from the abdomen or the anus, then you must pull it back covered by a cloth over the hand; and pressing the abdomen or the anus, straighten it out until the moisture that is there corrects; and if other members are dislocated, and the head remains, push the thumb into the anus deeply and draw it out to the mouth of the anus; then insert a finger or two, and pull it further; and if the mouth of the anus is narrowed due to abscess heat that has come, you should not strain it, instead you should administer moist and fat substances; and you should administer plasters, and apply them in warm softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the baby is on its side and you can make it straight, apply what we have said in our treatment for live births; and if this cannot be done, tear it apart piece by piece and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when this is done, apply what we have said in treating abscesses that come during marriage; and if bleeding occurs, it should be put under strict restraint, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whom an infant had died in the womb, then consulted another on this matter, and brought it back to life.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came in the armpit, and swelled so much that it burst, and began to putrefy.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, but could not stop the wound from bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong dressing, and out came a bone, then after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I wish to treat the wound and remove many bones as long as the woman is in a good position; and she should remain in this condition for a long time and then after a little while a little bit of pus will come out; and I have not remembered this chapter being used except when masters find something strange which they know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the translation for the next sentence:
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The horns should be more subtle than the restraining instrument, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the rod should be wide, and the edges of the branches should be, and a half palm in length; and between the two limbs should be two similar rods, which are closed on both ends, half a palm long or a little more; and these two rods are inserted into the wife's mouth to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of a rod of ebony or boxwood in the likeness of pliers; and to each shoulder there should be two rods, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the wife with the entire instrument, make her sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs open, then insert the two rods together into the wife, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs; then operate your hand with the whole instrument as you have done with pliers, according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the wife, until he makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all covered and multiplied in their likenesses; and when the masters have arranged them, the work is more urgent, and higher for humans due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not uncover the instrument unless you have arranged it, as their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to retain her afterbirth, then make her vomit with emetics, and hold your hands at her mouth and anus; if she jumps due to this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, take the spoon and make the syrup or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the dead person, such as rue, anise, camomile, cassia, centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over fire; then put a cord or syringe filled with the liquid into the mouth of the dead person, and hold it until the vapors enter the body of the dead person; then make the dead person vomit as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	The second sentence to translate:
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if the dislocation remains after this cure and does not heal as instructed, command the patient to wet her left hand in sesame oil or musk oil, then put it on nature, and seek again; when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straight, so that the muscles do not resist at extraction; but it should be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; it will come and release.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the anus has been stretched out (rectum), we have said the cure is to empty and fumigate with herbs; if it does not heal as we have said, ensure you do not pull too hard; but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the anus, bind him to the woman's leg, then cleanse with ointment four-medicine; when he can be pulled and reset, it will heal again; however, if he comes out badly, there will be a bad smell in the stomach and head, and it will hurt the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary that appropriate fumigations are provided for this case: no ancient has proven the fumigation of parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and seconding (afterbirth) is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it resembles glass like a dog's head, and the head is placed in its nature, with wide shoulders over the fire; and let there be fumigation over the coals, and the tinder until it is burned out, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born without a proper foundation, but it has been blocked by some subtle obstruction; therefore, it is necessary to pierce the obstruction at its appropriate place, not with a sharp spatula, and be careful that it does not touch the wound; then put damp linen soaked in wine and oil on it, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stay reset, put or insert a splint of wood, and leave it for several days, and let it be removed when the bones appear to have moved in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes comes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover the sore: if healed, as we have said with a splint of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at its foundation   (In this context, a fistula is an abnormal passageway or channel between two organs or parts of the body.)
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodules, and those that come out from above the foundation swell, or in the space of two parts, there may be one fistula or more; and when this nodule is old, it opens up, and moisture awakens blistering or a subtle boil, and sometimes these fistulas become persistently draining; and they are recognized by those who are experienced that it has either discharge or ventosity when the patient experiences discharge, and in some cases, it gushes outward.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the knee joint, and up to the calf of the leg.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one recognizes the fistula persistent at its base, and not persistently; it is that you bite your thumb or base of the finger, and bite a thin awl of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If there is twisting, then insert a thin splint or horsehair, feeling the splint or hair at your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and no pus, gas, wind, or worm comes out as we have said: know that it will not pierce; hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is open to the bladder or conducts urine, if it leaks urine and cannot be sealed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced up to the knee joint, then the splint comes up to its place; if there is no twisting and the pain disappears around it, it is that it should be bound there, and no medicine or ointment helps it; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure but labor and the vain efforts of foolish healers who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In a person who is not a Persian and not old, for the hope of health through fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts the legs up to the thighs, and has the thighs inclined towards the abdomen; then push a tent of pitch or plank, if there is curvature, until you know where the dislocation comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around the base, then you must push your index finger there, until you feel that the dislocation has been pierced; and if it is discovered where the dislocation is, either the bone or the flesh, then know that it is a Persian one; do not touch it further as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 One should say that some can be healed well, but this happens seldom; and the aid given, it is this: one should heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; and push it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these charred parts are burned, which resemble a feather of an eye; and then cure with moistened bandages in butter, until those charred parts disappear, then cure with soothing ointment.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise and if the fistula is not opened up to its base, put a thick covering of skin or linen between your thumb and the fistula; so that you can see the fistula through this thin covering; then press from the beginning of the fistula and push it towards the fistula, then the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the end of the fistula; and the bladder will be released, with the char remaining; then burn off those charred parts that resemble a feather of an eye, and leave none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the flesh is soft and cuts between you and the abscess, cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery brings two good things: burning of these joints joined together and stopping the flow of blood and removal of moisture; then treat wounds soaked in soft cheese or broth crushed chaff, until the limbs are hardened, and the charred joints are placed in the chaff; then treat the wound with ointments hard as stone and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it will be healed and will not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula arises until it reaches the full depth and is located outside of the body, you should press on the affected area or foundation, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the wound, and between it is fabric or hide or bone that is about to pierce, there should be no more than one way of faith and hope through the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you hit to the bottom, or if boils, treat as previously; but do not go too deep so that you do not cover the foundation holding it, and the pus comes out voluntarily; then treat, as we have said; by chance, it may heal, or remove that covering and clean when it is pierced from the foundation, either through fabric or other instrument appointed; then remove the dead flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part distant from the foundation: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it is at the base of the skin above, take a sharp probe according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	Then push one threaded needle into two, and push the tent all along the thread into the fistula up to the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 When the fistula is at the margin of the base within, then pull out the thread of that probe so that you can insert your finger or base; and pull out its head and bring the two ends together, holding one against the other, and leave them for a day or two; and squeeze it occasionally, until the threads break the charred parts between them, and they close; then heal the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, make it open in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not advisable to cover a dislocated joint with a plaster, and then cure it while it is still swollen, as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the sharp probe for making a fistula is very pointed at one end and beveled on the other, so that it does not harm what should not be harmed, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Emerodies occur in two ways: either they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are both small and large ones; and on the surface, there is already blood, and there is one or more, and they are displaced from the foundation and from the head of the foundation; but those that are displaced have a little moisture, and at the same time or a little citron juice or blood, and have the color of the body; and the treatment for those that have them within the foundation is to command the patient to strain by urinating in chambers until the foundations loosen, and this will be noticed by the children; if you hurry, and place it in tongs, or hold it with your nail, then strike at its roots; and if the hook cannot hold it due to moisture, take it with cloth or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair; and stretch them out on your hands, then strike, and sprinkle some hot powders on top that are in place of cautery; or cauterize them as said in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other cures until they are healthy; and if the foundations cannot loosen, clisterize the patient with biting and sharp clisterium to clean what is at the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the patient feels this, and the filaments have left the foundation, the cure is easy; and it is necessary to take them with your nail or tongs, strike them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You must apply the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, and turn both ends of the thread below the needle and make it large; bind the thread, then knot it, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving the superfluity of blood; then place a moistened cloth in rose oil or wax on the foundation and place it on top, and command the patient to rest; then leave it until it seeps, and when it is drained, cure it with ointment and other treatments until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The drying of wounds or foundations.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often, the drying out of wounds occurs in the intestines due to natural constraints and when the disease is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you cut the bark of a willow twig or your fingernail above, so it does not get wet; then heal it until it is dry as needed; and if it cannot heal, repeat the shaving stronger than before, as much as it bleeds, and be peeled; then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	The trembling (or shivering)
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A boil is a small growth occurring near the body and it grows greatly; and sometimes the frost bites it, and it feels as cold as death, and spreads throughout the whole body, and more in hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is that you take a cane of an owl feather or a strong eagle feather and place the cane on the frostbite so that it circles around the frostbite entirely; then turn your hand all along the cane until you catch the frostbite completely, and immerse it fully, and peel the frostbite of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it (like a chain of iron or steel), do this according to the following form, and be subtle inside and pull it out from above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce (the swelling), but hold it tightly and press it; and if you see it (the swelling), cauterize it as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a plaster   \* The text describes how to make a plaster for treating wounds or swellings.\* This sentence is describing the shape that the plaster should have, specifically "the form of a plaster."\* In medieval medical texts, the term "clistere" often refers to a type of ointment or salve used in wound treatment.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At times they make a silver or arsenic enema, or molten lead or mercury; and at times they make of these instruments small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when administering the treatment for children and the weak and sickly, the instruments are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema is large or small; it is tied in this manner above, according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And it should have an opening where the belly is connected, as you see, and the shoulders inside pierced; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other one; and the belly or arm should be filled with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and there should be space between each hole, then thread a strong cord through these holes in X or around, and sew up the belly as if it were a bag; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong cord, then clisterize; and this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the ministers hold it with their two hands together, until it is completely visible, then pull out the clistere, and tie the patient's legs to the floor so that the medicine comes out when needed; if it remains for a whole night, it is more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you want to treat a disease of abdominal distention, and the medicine works quickly, repeat it until it becomes healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are either founded or abscessed, it should be cleansed in the same way as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle enema where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the previous section the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the care for hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are by means of a stone, the cutting of swords and knives, or lances or fists or arrows, or similar things; or those that are made according to the laws of the body, such as wounds on the neck, head, chest, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound or sore comes, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from an arrow piercing or similar things, and the skin is torn completely and the wound is large; doubt the formation of an abscess: let it drain immediately of its own head if blood comes from the wound, and let it heal on the contrary of the injured part; and empty the patient's repletion with wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it does not drain, let its meat be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess forms there, only soft cotton soaked in rose oil or vinegar steeped; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, a little of the following powder: and if the fire has moved it, put some ointments on until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and of similar appearance, and the lips cannot be brought together by pressing, then join them with stitches, as I will explain for abdominal wounds, through stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed by bone, gapes, and does not hold firm, cover it; then heal the wound with medicine, put hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods such as cooked heads (testes) and wheat, also things like cabbages and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or skin corruption that is not connected to the bone, cover it all and throw it away, then heal it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein which cannot be stopped by medicines, you should try to stop the artery; and if you find the artery dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize (it).
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if the wounds are small and simple, it is an easy cure: and it is that you put this powder which cements them once the herb has moved (it).
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the method of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and grind it finely, then apply it to the wound, press it firmly, until it exudes well and joins all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it to heal, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Sometimes this is done only with chalk, when no incense or dragon's blood is available, but the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the fire has burnt the wound, in that case do not put this powder on it; but apply some digestive ointments or barley flour made with water and honey until it boils; then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle forceps; and I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes in or on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is nerves, there should be no other device except to let it heal naturally and not put anything restricting, because this harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, as the nature of nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain which is the highest member; but be the medicine soft, such as boiled water in sweet oil, and apply warm water to it in the same manner, and other suitable remedies according to this method, and moist immediately.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, wrap it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is swollen and full of pus, pierce it or lower its position; and if the arteries are cut, and blood flow ensues, stop it, lance it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spines of the throat are cut or the veins, keep them closed, so that the flesh passes, if the vein rises on the throat chain and does not touch the throat but is returned according to its natural figure; then press gently, leave it for some days, then treat with rejected ointments until it heals; and if the wound has pressed against the bone, pierce it; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out completely as you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound festers, and make the issue drain and align it; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound caused by lance or knife.   --> of the lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a spear or knife wound and the wound is deep, check if the patient is showing signs of air escaping from the wound: know that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at first hour or bind it because the blood may dissolve the wound completely, return to the heart, and kill the patient; instead, apply attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound for drainage of moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound 3 or 4 days, or more; no spasm or bad heart tremor caused by fear should appear; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat the wound and other treatments as long as it is healthy; but if it cannot heal, then know that there is a fistula; treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is a sword or knife incision, simple, deep or on the back, then treat what is in front of it; if it is large, sew it up; and if it is small, use powder, and if it is pressed against the bone, and has pieces of flesh, treat the wound and pull out the debris, unless they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound heal naturally, and apply extracts for other wounds as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	the dislocation of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The dismemberments of the abdomen are large, medium and small; from a large wound, any intestines occasionally protrude once, or the layers of the intestines, due to which their introduction [into the body] is difficult; and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because they insert more intestines into it if not done carefully from inside out; because the intestines inflate suddenly when they feel cold, so they protrude more, and therefore a medium-sized wound is better, because one can reset the intestines to their place better than with others. And know that the abdominal incision is according to four types: the two common stitches occur in the abdominal incision, and the stitching of other wounds on the body and two other specific ones are common for other wounds; however, they are more proper with the abdominal incision, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes from it, it is easy to set, as one of the two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in one of these ways: either moisten a sponge or dip a cloth only in tepid water, or cook it in tepid squill and cyperus and spike, and rub the intestines until the swelling disappears; and sometimes make wine-restrengnant, and warm it to help reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling separate, if you anoint the intestine with water or alum and malves cooked, for this way is closed the entrance to little; and if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument of which one copes hemorrhoids; and the first cure is warm it that it festers, but not too much that you should cut it without great necessity; and this is the instrument for slicing: slit it along the curve and do not spread it, and look at its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines fall out, put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper location, if you have the power, for this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is in the part beneath the abdomen, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; if it is in the part beneath the abdomen, then raise the head and the hips higher than the parts beneath; and thus, when the hernia of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, direct your attention to making the injured part higher than the other. And so, direct this advice to large and small wounds alike.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 Place small wounds with what you have prepared, then take a compassionate person who will press the entire wound with his hand and bring the edges together; this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more than one, according to the size of the wound; leave some space from the edge of the wound and insert a needle with a strong thread; pierce the two layers of skin with the two layers of fat beneath, which is under the skin, until you pierce through this part; assemble the two edges of the fat together three times; then wrap a double thread around the needle in two places, then bring together the edges of the wound again, and leave some space, and insert another needle; tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this until the entire wound is held together; the needles should be medium sized, neither too fine nor too thick, for very thin needles pierce through all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well; do not push the needles too far from the flesh and skin, so they don't open or injure the wound before it heals; then tie the needle heads, so they don't hurt the patient while sleeping, and wrap cloth or bandages around the needle heads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound heals; this method of stitching with needles is more useful for small wounds, because a single needle or two can perform the second stitch, and it is that you assemble the two layers of skin and the two layers of fat together with one needle where there is a strong thread; and when you have sewn all parts together, remove the needle to the part where you began, in the way cloth is rolled; leave space between each stitch the thickness of a small eggshell; this method of stitching is known as "the man's," and I sewed a wound with a man who had a belly, which was stabbed by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and the intestines were about two palms wide, and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine when it had been twenty-four hours gone, and the wound healed up for fifteen days, and it was healed, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 They had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not heal him with any ointment, because I was in the place where none were found, nor any medicines; and I put cotton old twice a day on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Now I shall tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and thrust it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced the skin straight through, place the head of the thread or stitch where you have put in the needle, and pierce it again from the inside to the outside in the same manner; and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the tailor does fur, leaving a hole once on one side, and taking it up again on the other, until the stitching is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of suturing, which Galen calls specifically, is as follows: one joins together the two parts naturally and applies the head of the needle to the other head, in this manner: stick a needle or head of the awl at one place, and pierce only that spot, leaving the two heads of the awl; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part towards the inner part, through the two heads of the awl; then pierce both from the outer part towards the inner part, in the other two heads of the awl located on the opposite side; and this is the turned method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens uses this term and is confirmed by many, that one should sew the belly with two needles, each with thread in it; one needle should be pushed from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew corsets; know that when the wound is within the belly, the stitching is more painful than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgement of the wound is like that of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, before the herbs have moved it, you should replace the intestines and the fat; then put powder healing char on it, and if the herbs have moved it, apply any ointment available until the wound closes; sew together each thread, and bind the sifac (?), and the mirror; then treat the wound as other wounds, until it heals; and if you don't have medicine, apply old cotton on it, as soon as it starts to close, and move it two times a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You need no other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound communicates with the principal members, then you must moisten light linen with warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the edges, and under the buttocks; and if there is pain or pus in the belly, and this happens frequently, then you should clisterize with black wine, and the same applies if the pus comes up to the intestines; and pierce it through, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the inflammation of veins within it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the hernia pops out of the wound, put it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned black, you must cut away the black part so that no blood comes from it, because there are veins and arteries there; then seize what is between the hernia sac, and hang the two heads hanging from the part below the wound to straighten the extraction when the hernia pops out, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the eyeball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I have seen a man who was pierced or stabbed by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and flatulence; I cured it according to what I knew, and did not stop until it was healed, and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it sew [the wound], I doubted that the patient had ill in his stomach; and he had no ill, but improved in better condition, and ate and drank; and said any experienced one that when it has a small wound in the intestine, that it should be tied up in such a way: take strong pincers, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the pincers have opened the mouth, place it on the two edges, so that it stretches its mouth open; and then strike the head, and keep it so that it cannot separate, then put another pincers after in the same way as before, until the wound is all taken up; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the head (of an organ) becomes inflamed in the intestine and brings no harm to the patient, it can be sewn up with a thin thread made from the intestine of an animal, like this: take a piece of that thread of intestine that is fairly sharp, then attach it to the head of the thread with a thin thread of flax, twist them together, then insert the thread into the needle and sew the intestine in this manner; and this method of stitching is not useful unless it follows the path of faith and hope. If the wound is large and wide, particularly if it is in one of the greater intestines, there is no trick or cure, except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals and becomes swollen, is universally called "fistula", and the same when it breaks open and bows out.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And fistula is by truth a knot formed hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it swells in the same way as the feather of a bird; sometimes it clears up with a clear discharge, and other times thickens; sometimes shallow, and other times quite deep; I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is otherwise but by one of the nine causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or body; or by its corruption; or because there is hard flesh within, and above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or it has too much pus; or the limb is paralyzed, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or corruption is a form of pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow healing, and sluggish by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the medicines for treatment in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you how to treat a fistula that is made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because there are fistulas that come from the great veins, arteries, nerves, or the intestine, bladder, kidneys, any of the ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and it is such that comes to the property of the main member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to cure, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if any fistula does not come up to the level that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it recognized, take a tent made of bee wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, pierce it; and if the fistula is twisted, search for a thin tent of wood, because the woods bend around the curvature; and if the fistula has been broken and you cannot find it with tents, cleanse it through one of the openings, because moisture runs from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then pierce it as skillfully as possible, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and if it is fully closed, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly understand the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or in any of the places that I have mentioned, then cut as described, and remove the rotten tissue and corrupt matter that are inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply situated directly, then you must cut through it completely, as much as possible, then place moistened tents filled with medicine in it, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous matter that remains inside; and then apply fresh charmed oil, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve does not weigh down or the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, remove all decay until it is entirely removed, then cure with charms for healing things until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, make an incision as before, know that you are not going to the font: uncover and dig down until you reach the bottom, remove all decay, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the corruption is too deep, you cannot reach it; and if there is only a small rotten bone, and you can extract it with pliers, remove it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, remove them all without leaving any; and if moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, use hammer, moisture, and fire, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove [the foreign body] within an hour, put something irritating on the wound around the bones, and leave it until the flesh is rotten all around the bone; and then the bones will be easier to remove. If it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, press only on the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then close the wound again. If there is a large part that has become corrupted and has reached the bone molecule, you should excise and cover everything up to the corruption, and then heal it until it heals; I will tell you of a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so take example and help from this.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within his body, so that the matter came to his leg, and he burst open with a large abscess, and had no reason to defecate; but they mistook it for folly and opened up the abscesses many times, and much matter came out, and it became a fistula, and much pus flowed that all went bowel and moisture from the body; and many cures were put around him for two years, and no wise man in the art of medicine was present, until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines they used to heal him, and what ran out through the sores with great flow; and the young man's body became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I sewed a tent over one of the wounds, and then I searched for all the wounds, and found that some were coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Then I hurried and dug into one of the wounds as far as I discovered part of the bone, and found it rotten and broken, and the rot was reaching the bone within; what appeared to me to be rotten bone seemed to be all there was, except for that which remained; and I began to heal the wound with medicinal salve for a long time, but could not close it; then I renewed my efforts, as before, and discovered the bone again, and found continuous rot in the bone, and removed it, and then attempted to heal the place; but I could only dig around a palm's breadth of the bone, and the wound remained open; then I healed it with medicinal salve again; and it became healthy and closed quickly, but there was no need to continue the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for my fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Because of the evacuation, it often bleeds profusely, but it was completely healed, and a hard cyst grew in place of the bone, and it had good composition and no harm or adverse effects at all, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated as follows: take thread, and tie it to the open end of the bone; command someone to stretch it upwards; put another thicker thread of linen over the first thread, and tie it above the corrupted cyst that is away from the bone, and hold tight so that you pull out the corrupted cyst below, and uncover the healthy cyst in the place where you want it to be, so that it does not bleed the healthy cyst; put charcoal or a plaster beneath the bone to cover the corrupted cyst; and it must be done as much as can be seen and felt, and repeated.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part, you must uncover all the flesh; then put iron under it, and let the softer part of the corruption be opposite to the harder part, as we have said; and if the corruption is at a joint, strike the corrupted joint and hold the bone that it contains from the other side; and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other remedy but cutting; and if the corruption is at the end of the hand or foot, it is very difficult, but nevertheless you must investigate the corruption to see how it opens; and clean it in all the ways that you can, but be careful not to harm the vein or nerve; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and the appearance of the wound, and its thickness and thinness, and its hardness; and therefore, it is necessary to choose an instrument suitable for each kind of work; and know that the work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the symptoms of diseases; if you think that the tool that you need depends on what it must be.
dou feu	Hot iron (or cautery)
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head of the shoulder may burst out from within or from outside; and when you have administered that corrosive medicine for its cure, and it does not help at all, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the level where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient expires from this due to the lack of the member, or from the greater malice of the defect of the member; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and afterwards it turns black, because the corrosion of the member spreads from one member to another and takes over the whole body; hasten then to cover it, and if it is due to the sting of some venomous animals such as sea scorpions or snakes and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the hand, cover it and do not give it any space to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it comes up to the hand, hit at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; if it comes to the arm, strike the side; and if it passes the side, it is death, and there is no remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or breaks a bone: if it comes at the first joint, strike after the next joint; and if it comes or breaks, strike the whole bone; and if it moves in the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except to tire the patient until he dies; and the way to hit or bind the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch a servant one of the bands below, and another servant the upper band, and pull the flesh that is between the two bands apart with a large spatula, until the bone is exposed; then strike or bind, and put on both sides linen cloth so that the binding does not touch healthy skin, and causes the patient other injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. And when bleeding comes out while you work, then cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powder that restrains it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and cure it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to one man in my presence: he had a blackness that resembled a burn from fire, and this corrosion came first on his foot of the leg, until it affected the entire leg; and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered the leg with a dressing, and it healed; and a long time later, the corrosion returned to his hand or to one finger, and it came to me, and I applied repercussive substances after the cleansing of the body, but the corrosion could not stop; and he asked that I amputate his hand, and I refused, for I had hope of restoring the matter; and I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die, for the strength of man was weak; and he despaired of all things, and returned to his earth, and covered his hand with a dressing, and it healed; and I have told this story only because one does otherwise, if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 At times an abscess occurs in the charnel place and remains for so long that it causes a large swelling of the body; then it turns and pierces, and the pus jumps out, leaving the flesh visible, just like a knight's armor; and the skin that is above is as thin as fine linen unraveled, and will not penetrate to the bone or to the nerve, and such disease is called "sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistula"; and the skin should be cut all around, just as fine linen; and it does not heal due to corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If the skin hardens and the corruption is not complete and the skin is thick with fat, cure it with a poultice in this way: Look to see if the breasts are large and if the pores there are full of stinking odor, then apply an Egyptian-made poultice that is made like this: Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take some of it according to your need, make it into a water and honey mixture, and apply it to the breast, and squeeze out the pus; leave the medicine there for two hours, then drain it; do this many times until the breasts are healed and the pus is expelled; sometimes, when the Egyptian-made poultice is not available and you have no other choice but to use ashes of vinewood, pour water over them, let it cool, and apply it as a poultice, until you know that the breasts are clean; if the patient cannot bear this, or the Egyptian-made poultice or the water of vine ashes, then apply a honey and wine poultice where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood coagulate; when you have done this and believe that the breasts are clean, apply whatever ointment cures them, which I have described the properties or treatment of; if the openings in the breast are small and the cotton of the poultice cannot enter, widen it with a little iron, and put Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment over it so that it is widened; if the wound is too large, let it heal by itself and allow only the level or the poultice to enter; if the discharge from the breast is above, press down or press lower until it stops.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	1. When the intestine is completely protruded, do not let it hang out; and if you cannot cover the belly beneath as you see, arrange it in such a way that the intestine drops to its lowest point, because when the intestine is completely protruded, do not let it hang out and if you cannot cover the belly beneath as you see, arrange it in this manner: the intestine moves slightly downwards, and do not leave anything of the intestine; and take medicines to put on the wound, and place a linen cloth over the entire wound; then press firmly against the affected part near the hernia, and afterwards cover the hernia with another cloth according to the size of the affected area, and place it over the hernia in the wound to align the intestine, and do not remove the large cloth except after several days once; and the one who is on the hernia should often be removed to remove the hernia, and know what comes out from the hernia, whether it is poison or pus or indigestion; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that rises on the wound of the intestine, then know that the hernia will not heal yet, and approach the healing; then unbind it in the morning or the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes swollen indigest after many days, know that breasts do not shrink (atrophy).
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poison corrupts slowly, do not despair of health for it approaches health.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are men whose flesh delays in healing in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite; and if he indiscreetly eats sour milk after many days, his breast will not heal; and if the breast takes a long time to swell, and is swollen, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect, such as oil of roses, for there is great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take oil of roses, and make it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in substance; then mix and use it; and the same is better when cooked and thickened, when oil of roses is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it is over the fire; and then apply the plaster, and place it on the breast, and sometimes administer long Aristolochia root and celestial root, which is also like flour and chalk; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and sprinkle on the honey that I said, and use; and if the wound is deep and not healed by this cure, know that corruption is full, and makes pressure in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments; then cure it with the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nailbed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Parasitic abscess originates below the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally appears in other joints; and when it is neglected, it can grow, and run along the nail root until it reaches the base, possibly damaging it entirely; and then comes the corrosion up to the bone, causing such pain that the joint becomes swollen and the color turns foul.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When treating it as we have said in the previous section and the cure does not work, you should amputate the affected part. Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact; and if the nail grows into the flesh, begins to rot and blisters, you should place the iron under the nail so as not to touch the flesh, push it upwards, and gently and delicately cut the rotten tissue and remove it; then treat it with warm ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the tooth becoming corrupt, strike it in the nose as stated before, then cure it until it heals; and if it is wounded, punctured, and causes great pain, it is necessary that you drain it first; then strike the nail with the sharp probe transversely, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain; and if this happens, place something to ease the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The boil that arises in some men's hands by chance is completely fleshy, and by chance it has flesh or bone, and sometimes there is a nail, and sometimes one grows from the root of the joint, where the growth occurs in some noses of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 He who is born within any knot does not remain silent; he who is born at the joint of the knot, may remain silent; the size of one who is fleshy is light in this manner: measure him by his root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: hold it with a cover;
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who is born or must at the last knot, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, then heal it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same sores that come to the joints come together due to birth, or due to injury from a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If you cut the suture, it must be repaired according to their natural shapes; then place between two tents or dampened cloths in oil, so that they do not adhere; or you may place between two thin pieces of plank, until the joint is healed, as necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Also, if any of its two sides comes with the palm, strike that suture as needed.
des vils	 The poor ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are large veins filled with excessive, melancholic mucus that come in many members of the body; and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk a lot and work hard, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer purges of gall and then cleanse the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The cure with iron is done in two ways: one is by striking it, and drawing out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The incision is done in this way: first heat the leg with very hot water, making the flesh softened, then hold the patient's leg above the knee down to the part below the kneecap; then strike the vein in one of the three places, with a wide cut, then separate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's strength can bear; and then tie it up, and command him to eat food that cleanses the black bile; and repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and help the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The elevation of the haematoma is done in this manner: Rest the patient's leg, if it has much hair, then immerse it in warm water, and rub the patient's leg with hot water until it turns red and swells; and if there is no bathing water available, heat the affected area with fire. Then press towards the swelling near the knee or below the ankle; peel the skin around the swelling from both sides as it appears, so that it can be seen; and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord. Push the head of the bone inside until the swelling is raised above the skin, then gently pull it back to the incision, then press in another place three fingers away. Peel the skin over the swelling again as it appears, lift it up as before, and press at the tip of the toe, then pull and remove it until it is all pulled out, unless you cannot pull it or lift it. If not, push a thick needle through the whole length of the cord and draw and pull it, pushing it under the bone, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out; make sure it does not break, as it can neither be drawn nor lifted, causing harm to the patient. When you have completely treated it, put moistened wool soaked in vinegar and oil over the wound and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is contracted and twisted, bent together and not straight, as we have said, then you should cut it harshly, but do not cover it; and draw [the parts] as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The shape of the iron used to strike the face should be curved and not sharp, cutting the vein; it is thick, for if it is thin, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	 From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is located in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow and on dry land; but by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of worms that come from under the skin as they move inside the body, penetrating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the limb changes color, and the vein begins to burst forth like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head of the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from 6 to 8 inches long and sew it, leaving the plank on the leg, and every time it points outwards, you should wrap it again with the plank and sew; and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the remaining, but do not cover its root, until it has completely burst forth; because if you cover it, it returns into the flesh, causing abscess and worms or other illness; for this reason, it must be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated reaches a length of 5 or 10 fingers, and once it came to me, from which it burst forth 10 fingers long. When you pierce it, press a clove or garlic, and pierce it until it is completely empty; empty the matter that is inside, introduce into the wound medicines against worms every day for a while, then cure as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes in opening this vein, many times it reopens itself, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or hand and much blood flows out; then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often appears in cattle and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, moving through the body expanding and contracting, causing pain in one limb after another until the skin or it breaks, and jumps out; it is an infestation of pus from certain humors, as serpents, larvae, worms or roundworms in the stomach come; its danger is suspected because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, and comes to the eye, it may enter the oil and destroy it; this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it to cure and drain, one can force it out only when it moves: Therefore, you must tie the place above and below with a strong cord tightly, then strike above and drag it out, and if its head is buried deep in the flesh, and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest damage that it does, is that it corrupts oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, hold a thin spoon under it, then strike above, and drag it out; and it is necessary to use the patient for purification of body with soluble medicines for bad humors, and avoid eating spoiled foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 The pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that moves from one member to another; and I have seen this as I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; afterwards, I noticed it rising like a worm towards the shoulder, very quickly, just as hot silver cuts from one place to another; the pain spread from that place and pierced the shoulder, and shortly after it ran through the whole body until it came into the other arm; then she told me that it returned again around the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how it moved from member to member, because I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 I would have wished that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins open, and for this reason such constrained windiness appeared; and they do not appear according to this reasoning to those who are ill and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to cure this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, lie it above and below hastily, and then press on it until the constrained windiness goes from the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it in your eyes, cure it with those who drive out windiness, such as fetid pills and serapin pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	 arrows (or projectile points)
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are of various kinds, according to their shapes and the places in the body where they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The differences among them are that some have large points, and small, and smooth, and hinged; and some have two angles, and others have tongues, and some that have pieces; and when it falls into any member, it falls in one of the two ways: either in a principal member, like the head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it falls into any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you after, warns you: if you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for the death comes in many ways after; and when this ill sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully in, pull it out, and care for the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the signs of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and a wound appears above the brain, are scotomia (blurred vision), sode (swelling or tumor), esvertin (convulsions), roujor en eulz (redness in the eyes), inflammation and redness of tongue, spasms and confusion of mind, vomiting of bile; and possibly without fever from the nose or ears; and perhaps losing speech and voice; and a white discharge from the wound resembling pus, and it may also weep like bruise of flesh; and if these signs appear to you, refrain from treatment and remove the arrow if it isn't embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it strikes or pierces, is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels as if it has been driven into something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrowhead also closes up like a fingernail, and in court black blood appears, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: therefore, know with certainty that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that has not penetrated the flesh is when there is no scum coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrow falls on the bed cover, it has missed the ribs; and it causes great pain and sighing, and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrowhead or stomach falls out of the wound by chance, any undigested meat may jump from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrowhead or stomach falls out by chance and anything from the intestines escapes through the wound, there is no hope for recovery nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrowhead falls into the bladder and urine escapes and leaks out, causing the patient great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the arm and neck, shoulder and joints of the shoulder, spine of the back, rib cage and thighs, legs, and limbs resembling them, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it's not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, you should do this:
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 When an arrow strikes or pricks a man in the root of his nose, I pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear fat, and it was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And the pulling out of an arrow that strikes in the oil beneath the paper below (meaning under the skin), and the arrow is curved, and cannot be reached but the tip towards the bone; and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, with all its feathers remaining; the archer was healed, and there were no ill effects.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabic arrow with ears: I was the barber, and I made it as subtle as possible before pulling it out, and the Christian recovered.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And I pulled out an arrow that was lodged in a man's chest or abdomen, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I made a cut on the arrow, tricked it, and pulled it out without any complications.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if you see a man who has an arrow in his back and the wound is sewn shut; and the arrow remains inside for a long time without changing its natural position or causing any harm to any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And if another man receives an arrow in his face and the wound heals; and remains like that for a long time without suffering great pain, and many similar things happen.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And an arrow was shot at the prince king, who had fallen in the snow and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely buried. I was called to treat it after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I probed it with a thin probe and did not feel anything; but he felt pricking and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I placed a leech-like remedy on it that is soothing and digestive, because the wound did not swell; and the arrowhead appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I placed the plaster on his hand for several days, and healed the wound straightaway, so that the patient felt the arrowhead inside his flesh each day; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied a corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was opened, and then probed it, and felt the head of the arrow sticking to its place; then I cauterized in the opening of the wound with that same corrosive medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible; and it healed well beyond four months, and then the wound closed up so much that I could not remove the pliers from it; therefore, I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I made the pliers properly according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, as long as I pulled on it and returned the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the experts judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I will restore it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, but do not take my word for it entirely, because books cannot grasp everything; however, wise masters comprehend a small amount and the present and failing case, find nine works and new tools, to the detriment of foreign things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows do not enter the limbs where they are inserted except in two ways: either through the side or from the front; and those that burst forth where they enter are called "arrows entering into flesh," and at times they may burst forth now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is healed around, and make the wound smooth; and similarly, if it has been driven into the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day; then it will jump, and if it still does not jump, perforate it all around with a fine instrument, until the surrounding areas are widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 And if the arrow is driven into the skull bone and goes up to one of the ventricles in the brain, or any of the accidents I mentioned before occur for the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it becomes even after several days, because if the arrow reaches so far, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not driven far beyond the bone but only reaches it without breaking, and the patient experiences some bad condition for several days, then consider drawing it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is deeply lodged and cannot be extracted, administer tourniquets as I have told you, then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrow is hidden within the body and cannot be seen, exert all your effort to find it; if you can feel it, draw it out with an appropriate instrument if possible; if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen the wound as much as possible; draw the arrow if you can, and if it has ears like a fishhook, remove the affected tissue on both sides as much as you can, and then bend or break the "ears" of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow while pulling it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then lay the body down towards its joints, then pull, because the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the discharge of blood hinders recovery, bring what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and beware of incision of the nerve and vein, and provide a means to draw out the arrow safely, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot do it, put it as the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow coming from another part, if it opens anything of it or the skin is swollen where one can see or feel it; cut then across, as far as the pliers can take hold, and then pull it out; if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If the arrowhead is lodged in the bone, turn your hand round, so it enters into the bone and expand the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, leave it still and then continue the extraction until it does emerge; and if it is an arrowhead inside, push it all the way in; and if it has fallen, and you see that it needs to be administered gently, give a tool with a long handle, so that the point of the arrowhead enters the hair of the tool; then push harder, and if the arrowhead is embedded, insert the tool pointedly into it, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrowhead falls in the side or the belly or the bladder or the flank, and it is near and you can cover it, do so; and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, then remove it, and sew up the wound if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows is similar to an owl's beak, as shown here:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of doing it: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the root of the hair is also like the quill of a bird, to push at the point of an arrowhead, as shown in this figure:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for pushing and pulling is as follows here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of the common veins (of the body)
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The number of veins from which one recovers is thirty-one, thus it has a chief sixteen, that is to say: Two batans which are after the ears, called "doubles herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the temples apparent; and the two veins which are on the cheeks of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that is between the eyebrows; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the two windings which are on the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich"; and the two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly healed in every arm are V: one is cephalic, and it is situated on the left side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the head"; the median is called "fast," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; the basilic is located on the right side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the elbow, and it is the one from which blood is drawn, which opens obviously above the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The cubital and ulnar are the veins that are between the ulna and the little finger; it has two rain-like branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is beneath the wrist on the left side of the chest, and the second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nase," which is at the other ankle's wrist; and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The sick person should help the drainage of veins that are behind the ears with ancient cathartics and emetics; and the quality of draining, as I tell you, is to seize the head of the patient, and rub the place or the veins with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head; then press down where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, and seize it; then take the lancet and push it through the vein until the bone, then move your whole hand up the entire vein, pierce and the skin and the vein well twice through, and make the blood come out until you see; then tie and hold it, until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The first artery of the two in the temples, is useful to treat migraines, scrofula and chronic otitis media; and its properties are as I say: and it is that the patient tilts his neck so that both veins appear clearly; and you feel a pulsation under your thumb, then press on it; then lift the skin above the vein towards your head, insert the lancet, lift the vein and squeeze, as you have done in other veins, and draw the blood according to your need; then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it; and then form a knot and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about its closure and its extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The following of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the incision of the skull for diseases of the face of olden times, and it has migrated and turned red; and its qualities are that the patient tilts his neck while turning, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, allowing the blood to flow according to its quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flames should not be too sharp; and the vein should be pierced transversely, as the bone is near, and in case the flames are too thin, they might break when they are too fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The incision of the two veins that are in the eyes helps with inflammation, swelling, turning red, pain in the eye, and diseases of the face; and its qualities are that the patient tilts his neck while turning to one side, as before; then heal it, and make the incision across, a short distance from the flame, but wide enough because there is no charcoal.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then make the wound bleed, as much as needed, and then cover it with linen, and hold it in place.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein of the nose in the nostril is useful for headaches, scrofula (chronic infection of the lymph nodes), and diseases caused by heat, such as migraines and redness that occur in the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the vein is that the patient stretches their neck, then holds their nose with your left hand, takes fine, long flame, and pierces it between the two nostrils, since the nose does not open easily at first, and the blood will begin to flow soon; do not go too deep, and make the blood flow according to necessity, then let it rest for a night, since it is quickly restored; this is the form of flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The first guinea pig's bile helps in the tightening of the anus, at the beginning of the process of healing, and with many diseases, inflammations, corrodings, herpes, and ulcers; and the quality of the bile is that the patient strains his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and the master being above the patient's head, and the patient lies on the bed, then he opens the vein from one end a little widely, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then he does the same in the other vein, then unties the ligature, and gently tightens all the veins so that the patient does not strain; and leaves it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 From the surgery of livestock
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the purging of the veins in the lips above, it helps for coughing in the mouth, and for the corruption of the gums, and for cracks in the lips, and for the toothache and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of surgery are to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I said; then turn the jaw, and look at the two veins, one on the right jaw and the other on the left, and these can be recognized by their being black, and by small veins surrounding them: therefore grasp both, and if you do not know which ones they are, or if you are in doubt, grasp the larger of each, and do the same with the upper and lower veins, for it is the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 From surgery under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The surgery of the veins under the tongue helps after the cephalic surgery, and it is in the throat constriction, and with eye diseases, and mouth diseases; and the qualities of a surgeon are that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and he licks his tongue, and looks below on each side for a black vein: therefore grasp one and the other, and do not go too deep, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins that are commonly healed follow two methods: either by pricking them deeply with a broad iron needle or with a thin olive-oil type syringe, as you call it, and they are called "anesil"; and they are large and thin according to the size and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirtin is very famous, and is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 It is necessary to open hairless large veins that contain a large amount of blood and are turbid; this is the shape of the olive-oil syringe.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and subtle, for cleansing thin veins with subtle blood or yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are under the neck, throat, breast, and stomach; it is necessary for the patient to heal correctly and to empty the artery that is underneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 If it touches the artery and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I said; but the flame should not be pricked, but rather cut like a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 If the bladder does not open manifestly, it must be opened, and change another if you wish any relief from it or it becomes sick in its place, the vein opens manifestly; and strike the flame with a needle as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you want to know the place of the pain, then you must press the arm until you feel the pulse; then mark its location and bind the arm; strike the vein with the flame like a needle; be careful not to wound the artery when you see it swelling, for it is the artery; avoid that then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it rise high like a child's urine and the wound is red and thin, know that it is not from an artery: therefore, hurry up, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops; leave the arm like that, and do not move it; let the patient be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound does not stop bleeding and the medicine is not present, stop the artery if it is open, for the head of the limb will retract; stop the bleeding from the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 Take a bark of fumitory and cut it in half, and place one half on top until the next day; if it stops bleeding, that is good; if not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and stopping the bleeding should not be overdone due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from both above and below, as it is made up of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and the physician should pierce it along the nerve that is underneath, but if he pierces too deeply and finds the nerve, and inflates it and the patient becomes sick or injured, and there is a possibility that it cannot heal; and this nerve often opens up multiple times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, you must cauterize it with the instrument. And pull out the nerve to your ability.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The vein of the head helps to drain blood from both above and below, and aids in healing wounds; and it is necessary to pierce with olive oil or myrtle fire, as this is the safest of all veins, as there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Therefore, one must seek the easier joint, and not to worry if it is necessary for the first time, and we try again; and perhaps the joints swell in some men when it is necessary for the first time, but do not worry about it.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound, according to your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it should not be performed except to maintain health and to prevent future illnesses; and bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the femoral, or the basilic; and bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and bloodletting should be performed on the first day or the third day, three hours or four days afterwards.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The treatment for illnesses is not determined at any specific hour, but it should be administered whenever necessary, day or night, in all hours and at every moment; and it is not appropriate to treat children under the age of 14, nor women during pregnancy except for the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	It is not necessary to cleanse those who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When someone wants to be treated, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that their intestines are cleansed with a light enema, if they have retained much gas, so that the veins do not carry away the waste products and harm the main organs; one should not treat those who are very salty from foods, drunk, or overly exhausted, as long as they are still intoxicated; nor should one treat those suffering from colic pain, vomiting, stomach disorder, excessive appetite, and excessive sexual activity, hard work, staying awake, and fasting, and those whose vitality is depleted, either due to the weapon or the body itself; then refine the humors, if they are not too thick, with foods and drinks and medicines, if you have that power; then bathe, unless anything prevents it, to thin the blood, and treat the vein on the left side from the third one down, as we have said; and keep that day free of work, pain, lust, and similar things; be patient and joyful, and let the healer be above the one being treated, and rub their arm two or three times, then gently loosen the ligament on top, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot heal itself; then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the healer's finger with a little old oil, then put his right hand's thumb on that vein under the area where one wants to treat, so that the vein does not flee and fail when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 For there are veins that run like cords in the body, and some of these are full of pus, so that when fire is applied, it shrinks away from the flame and cannot open the vein, and such is the case with some; and if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, which requires that the person who does this should be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, that is good; but if not, continue again under that place or near immediately, unless the wound is inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the limb is swollen and the patient fears, leave it for a day or two, do not tie the arm: perhaps pus will come out; do not immerse it in water, then repeat the cautery if you wish; and if the hole is small, or the wound is shallow and you doubt that there is much blood, apply the fire directly to the hole itself; and open it a little hastily, so that the limb swells again; for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the limb swelling, do not start draining it immediately, but put a little oil of lard on it, for it alleviates the body from blood, and the oil is solidified in that place; and thus administer the oil of lard in each wound to stop the flow of blood; and this same oil also serves as a plaster and poultice when applied to the limb; if it becomes too thick, it becomes fine and spreads when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 If a large abscess occurs, which often happens when the wound opening for vein draining is small, act quickly, and put hot, wet sponge on the limb and press it for an hour; then you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains at the place for some days without any black or green discoloration, it does not harm; and if you see, put something of aloes or myrrh steeped in warm vinegar, mastic, or a similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often abscess and appearance occur at the opening of the basilica: place your hand on it then, if you find the area soft under the pressure of your hand, this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But do not apply any of the things we have said, because possibly it is an artery; but place one dry bandage to stiffen it, then treat with another cure until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	Draw blood from each (wound) according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the wound is black, let it drain until it turns red; if you see it swollen, let it drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it is necessary for the one who is full and hollowed out, and requires bloodletting, to make a larger incision, and let the veins be wide; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and it should be drained little by little, and it should be drained through slicing sideways, not pricking; and this method of bleeding is safe from incorrect bleeding and nerve compression, and worth more than long bleeding rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For the one whose body needs bleeding, it is necessary to give moistened bread below the pomegranate; if he is heated, let him bleed three or four times; and for the one of cold complexion, pre-treat before bleeding with moistened bread in syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chives, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if it swells in the wound, after a great flow of blood, then one must apply gruel of charcoal, and scented subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If you want to burst open the arm or heal it again at another time, when it is weakened by much bloodletting, it is required that it be bled little by little according to its continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If you want to burst open the arm after the first bloodletting and one has a strong chest, it should be bled 6 hours after the first bloodletting or the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to heal from another part, must heal by the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body which has been heated and causes fever; then it must be drained in large quantity, and the wound should be opened wide until it swells again; then you must observe all the signs of swelling, and place your hand above the swollen part to prevent death by swelling, as this happens many times when those who drain the wounds are negligent; and it is not advisable to dislocate the arm and draw blood a second time, if the wound closes, you must press firmly; if it is curved, stretch the arm immediately, for this would be bad; but leave it until it swells again a second time; or burn the end of the arrow with the flame, so that the congealed blood from the vein flows out, and place the piece of fresh linen on top and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is burst, leave it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess has been calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If there is a need to draw blood again, then take it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are composed of many small veins.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of sainting is that the patient pushes their hand into hot water, until the flesh becomes red; then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then it should be pricked with a lance not through wide or long holes; and large wounds should be made, and the saining should be done close to the joint of the hand, and if one cannot pull out, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood come out in the water, as much as you have; and if it is cold, do not hit the hand with hot water again, for it puts more in winter than in summer; and saining of this vein is safer than all other veins, there being no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The hot cautery of the thumb of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: hold the thumb, apply hot sharp fluid until the vein escapes if you can see it; and if the hot fluid goes in sideways, and if you cover it completely on all sides, it will not cause any harm; and do not immerse too deeply, as nerves are naked underneath all over, then put the thumb back in hot fluid again, but ensure that the wound is not frozen and cannot heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drained the blood as needed, place oil and wax on top of the vein to seal it quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The poultice on the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I told you with the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The cautery of the vein (sophene) is effective for all diseases under the body, such as diseases of the stomach, retention of phlegm, diseases of the kidneys, and old diseases of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of his health is such that the patient must put his foot in hot water and rub it on the vein until it perishes, and tie above the joint of the foot; and when the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot goes much further; therefore, bind it there or as wide as the ankle, which is more beneficial.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	If you cleanse above the foot, guard against the nerves that are below, and cleanse through it as well, in the same way as when cutting; and let the fire be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the limb cannot come out, put it into water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 If the vein needs to be bound for the first time, start again a little higher, because it is salted; do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the soothing of the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The thigh of the sciatic nerve is at the knee joint, and its pain resembles that of the hamstring when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the quality of his health is such that the patient immerses himself or herself in water and pulls above the ankle four fingers while twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, you should bind it in every way possible, and by crossing; it is more beneficial to cut it, because the vein is full of bile, and is greatly susceptible to humans.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't heal it, no medicine will open or close the side of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; let the bleeding continue as much as you see fit, then cut the ligament, put cotton on it and press; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 The wound drains pus.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and ventosing is done in two ways: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This draining (ventosation) which is called wounding can be done in two ways: either with fire or without fire; and the draining performed by wounding and extraction of blood is performed in fourteen leagues of the body, from which one is completely in the head; and the others are in the neck; and the others in the two sides of the neck; and the wounds under the chin; and the wounds in the two shoulders; and the wounds on the shins; and the wounds in the two arms; and the wounds in the two legs; and the wounds in the two ankles; and the draining does not treat blood, unless it is small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it should never be avoided, if it is done like a wound drainage; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from congestion, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if by necessity due to illness it is required to bleed, or by custom, we administer this each hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and in every case; for there are those who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head; and those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in the eyes; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue swells, and they spit blood; and there are those who think, and see by no blood and nausea and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is at the end of the month, we order to bleed them after 3 hours from dawn.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The nosebleed helps alleviate headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this bleeding is in lieu of cephalic bloodletting, and one with a cold constitution or diarrhea should not use it, for it does great harm to them; therefore, those who have cold head diseases or who are watchful should not do it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal themselves often become negligent, and for this reason, the bellows should be placed a little lower due to the fear of neglect.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is in the position of the saint's jaw and basilica, and for that reason it is useful for pressing on the painful part, and for cutting the channel of the perineum, and totally, and filling; and it should be pressed gently because if it holds too firmly, it can cause obliance or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosation in the neck (costelz) is useful for headaches, optalmia and migraines, strangulation, tooth root pain, and is located at the basilica joint; you must instruct the patient to press gently with his hand without pressing the artery and no bleeding should occur.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilations under the chin are beneficial for mouth diseases, tooth decay, and similar mouth illnesses; they are located at the saint sites of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilations on the shoulders are beneficial for illness resulting from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the costal veins are as important as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; instruct the lord not to pierce too deeply, for the flesh is naked there and knows nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventosation that is on the rump is worth as much as emorroids from the foundation and diseases below, and it must be large, and made of iron, for it needs to draw well; and if it were too thin, it would break, causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings of the legs open widely because they draw blood from the entire body; they cause ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and reduce the flowers [in the body]; they are in the places of the knees and ankles, and everywhere else they weaken the body after long use, and bring pus to many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the swelling is that you first empty it, suck immediately and press hastily, move equally, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and inflated, and open the red color of the blood; then fart, and return the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh and clear pores: it is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the flesh is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to refine the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the bone is very thick, it should be struck three times; and when we wish to draw blood drop by drop, we must pierce only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 If we wish to draw a lot of blood, let us frequently do so; if the skin is thick, pierce deeply, and be sure that the nerves are cauterized quickly, and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the areas of the ventosations with stimulating and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, use oil of violets, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, use oil of watercress, lily, chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	and if the superfluidity is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the patient has to stretch tender skin and large pores, no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, cold water, vinegar water, cucumber water, lime water or another similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And one who has much moisture, if he rises from ashes or from myrtle water and sumac and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those with large superfluities should rise from old wine or sour milk, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others; and it is not advisable to ventosate before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep after the ventosation, and it is necessary that he urinate, when he needs to be ventosed and when he has been ventosed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And be aware that if the patient who is cured is coleric and lacks sharpness and is inflamed, it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as raw pears or endives and lettuces; and similar things; and consume little, and meat of young chicken, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 If the patient has a cold constitution, let him drink syrup of honey and moderately strong-smelling wine (between old and new), consume little, and chicken breast or pigeon; on the day he is purged, he should drink more than eat; it is also necessary to give some men certain times triple or muscat before or after purging, for strengthening the main limbs; and let the body of the patient be refined, but it must not be hot drinks for him.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The cauteries with fire are to be applied to the following parts: the liver, spleen, gout, stomach and side, the groin and flank, and the loins; for these members cannot bear to be struck with iron, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with mammary abscesses; to remove the thick fluid in a member, as we do with ventouses on the stomach and the flank to reduce the swelling; and relieve pain, whether there is an obstruction or stone, by its attractive power it may draw out the obstruction or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it acts when applied to the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these ventouses are administered empty for sucking only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold liquid, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the ventouse with warm or hot liquid containing cooked herbs appropriate for the case.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the blister treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should have a width of two fingers and half a palm breadth, and have a notch around the middle, as with pushing an awl, made of bone, soft in front so that it does not prick the patient when placed on the member; and in the middle there should be a rod of bone or iron, for putting a handle in place, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; because the tumors of children are different from those of the old, and the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And thus this tumor press should be placed on the member: take the handle of wax or linen and put it in the opening of the rod that is in the tumor, so that the light is at the bottom of the tumor so that it does not burn the patient; then place it on the member, and the fingers should be over the notch as we said, so that when one looks, if steam comes out, remove the tumor; and take the linen again as before, and repeat often, if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the bladder, which is administered in pleurisy disease, there should be neither prick nor piercing, and it should not be applied except when it is full of water, and it is placed only on the member; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without pricks or piercings should not be applied except to members where bladders cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places with no skin, such as the eye or nose, and others; and the quality of the user is that when you find bladders in clear, sweet water without impurities, take them; and place them in clean, sweet water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bladder; then be incised with a vein and bladder, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the bladders on it; and when they are full and warm, if it is a place where a bladder can be placed, put it there, as this is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If the shoulder is not in place, lift it up gently, then press down strongly, and then sprinkle it with vinegar; and if the shoulders are still not well aligned too far from the body, dampen a linen cloth with cold water, put it on until the sores dry out; and if the sores multiply, apply broken vitriol or sulfur and similar things until they dry up; or you put half-peeled fava beans on the shoulder and leave them until they harden onto the shoulder, it will now stop bleeding; and if you need more help, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the sores do not want to take leeches, you scrape the shoulder with fresh blood, or you prick it with a needle until the blood comes out and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they harden; and when you see that they are bleeding again, you sprinkle some powder of aloe and of silica or ash, it will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Inform the dear child that foolish people should avoid this chapter, for they never saw any of the old books or read any letters in them; and because of this, knowledge is alien to our land, for I have never found anyone good at it except through the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject and by experiment, and by the practice of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments presented, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore we shall now say the prologue of this book, the sums of the words and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and dwell on truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 When fracture or dislocation or twisting or swelling occurs in anyone, it is necessary that you clean the patient from both sides, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or the elderly; or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and do not eat cold foods, such as raw fish and mutton, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about abscess heating or expansion of matter in the member; if the patient returns to its first natural management, he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones start to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make good nourishment, or he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and meat of veal, beef, head, feet, pancreas, fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For by great nursing, the wounds are made worse and break more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that the bones broken in old or weak people cannot be well restored nor healed according to their nature due to the looseness of limbs, nor those who are too tender, like infant's bones; but do not worry, set on the broken bone the large splints that hold and join the limb together, as much as possible, so it enforces it as it was before; and provide no movement at all to it, and for this reason, feed him with coarse foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the neck is other than the break of the foot or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of break.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are breaks that heal on their own without setting, and others that need to be set in the manner of cutting the feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with an open wound, or a fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each way should have its tool and instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place; and fractures of the bone are known by the fact that the joint is twisted, and it opens well through dislocation, and strikes with pressure from hand; and when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no breakage; but it may have twisting or fissure, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not right that you move [the dislocation] with your hand, but put on medicines that come afterwards, and then hold it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fractures that go into the joint, and are the two parts disjointed, they should now be put back together equally, so that abscesses do not grow there; and if abscesses grow there, leave it for some day until the abscess is calmed down; then place it equal to the bone that you can easily and wisely move; and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of where there are pieces; then pull, as required below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if there are fractures in the bone with pieces, separating it into two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or at your hand a small member, or two tendons, or one tendon and at your hand; place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, reset them by all means with additions in their places as you can, and be careful that through your work there comes no injury nor pain to the patient; align well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: straighten it carefully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscess hot and contraction to the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is set, carefully restrain the patient so that it does not move, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 If it feels no pain, then it is not set, and you must put it in a position so that it feels no pain; ensure that it is straightened, lest twisting comes when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs can be various in smallness, size, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For small members, such as fingers and toes: you must wrap them with soft linen cloths; and for larger ones, such as thighs and legs: you must wrap with a large, stiff rope, because the thick ropes bind the whole large member evenly, and tighten it all equally, so that there is no swelling; then tie light strips of linen or cloth around it three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on the entire rope, then go above the break and tighten less, than the break, then move away a little from the break; and soften the rope little by little, so that you take a large part of healthy flesh; then take another rope, and twist around it in reverse over the broken limb; then return to the lower part of the break, and tighten slightly, not too much nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above; then put linen or cloth strips between the ropes, until they are all equal, then cover everything with a bandage, and then make your splints well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is swelling or abscess, place something calming for the abscess on top of it and remove the swelling; leave it thus for some days; then press on your elbows, and they should be about half the width of a thick cane, or of a rod used to make clefts, or of palm branches, and they should be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 And the elbows that one places on top of the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and they should also be as long as necessary for the limb, whether it is small or large; then press on the elbows in the same way as you did in the first instance, then tie a bandage over them, just as you did with the fracture in the first instance; tighter here, and less there; and the bandage should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; because if the bandage is thick, like those who make their bands from twisted flax ropes, which is a great error, as the bandage cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it should not have less than double the space between each elbow.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is gored by the heads of arrows after being stretched out in healthy places, place linen or woollen cloth over them to prevent bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is broken and the vessels ruptured, I will tell the cure after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to set arrows in all broken limbs immediately on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put hot irons on them before five or seven days, or more, according to your confidence in the abscess healing; and here follows the ancient method for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and it is that you take flour which is kept in the mill walls, mix it with abundant egg, and spread this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and apply it; and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fracture at various dispositions, and especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take barley and linseed and elder and wormwood and Arabic gum and mastic, in the quantity of ten; myrrh and aloes, in the quantity of five; elshorn flowers eight; grind them into powder and mix with a lot of egg; if the man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and it is useful to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another plaster method for twisting: take myrrh and aloeswood, 10 parts of each; cassia six parts; Armenian balm ten parts; grind well, mix with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method of splinting for joints and dislocated bones, relieving the pain that arises, and using it on bone, breaking: take new linen, moistening it in vinegar and cooked oil, place it on the joint or bone.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not heal but is good for easing abscess pain and properly relieving bone pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that sets broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth sorrel leaves, grind together, and make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of plaster to heal the fracture of the bone and accelerate the healing of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of mallow, camomile, violet flowers, bean meal from each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, mix with moist coriander water or vinegar and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (medical plaster) stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take root of vismalve (plants used in medieval medicine), linseed, balm of Gilead, clover, and sage, as well as the flowers of violets and camomile, all together in one part; grind and boil with saltwater, or sweet water, or wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance should be applied on a broken member for restoration except a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems Galen suggests that dry and slightly warm substances should be applied to a broken member for restoration such as myrrh, aloes, incense and similar things as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is good for injuries and pain: take ground up mugath (possibly a type of root) and crushed human hairs or feathers of birds, and add resin, and mix them equally, and grind them into a plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then dissolve it a little afterwards, and ensure that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bones moved from their place; if not dissolved for many days. If pain or itchiness comes to the site, or swelling without rest, hasten and dissolve it, apply ointment immediately; take a light cloth and sea sponge wet, immerse in water and lift up the area, until the itchiness ceases and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then cover with dry linen moistened in water or rose oil, and lay on a nut, until you are sure of abscess heat; and soothe the inflammation of the member, and remove the pain, then continue with subtle application, a little ointment, and do not strain it too much as before; and apply gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has cooled and turned red, pain and swelling have subsided, and you need plaster and linen, resume the binding as you did before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if no swelling comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it before three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and the joint approaches the flesh again; then hold it more tightly than before, and make the meat thicker, as I have said earlier; if you see the joint drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter therein; therefore give him hot moist heat, every third day and ease a little the swelling; by this means cut off the nourishment from the limb, and hastily correct what the foolish doctor does, who leaves the member twisted: it is harmful, and such work is dangerous, and I see no other remedy but to rest and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many types of fractures are, and they have diverse shapes, and the causes are determined; for there are fractures made by sword impact, and the collateral bone is broken all the way up to the shaft which is beneath the bone, as done by a hack or a thrust; and because of this, it is called this type of fracture "hack".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	For the sword strikes the bone from above causing it to pierce, and this method of breaking is called "absolute"; and these are the large or small wounds caused by these two breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is piercing indentation, or cleaving or fall from stone, or falling on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a persistent break, which reaches up to the fabric beneath the bone or on top of the bone, and this is the wound, whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if the wound is closed in the bone as thin as hair, and the crack is small, it is called this type of fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, falling, or something similar, and causes the bone piece to enter below, and the end of the bones are shaved like smiths do on top of cauldrons; when the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more often in those who have a moist bone head, such as a child's head; and it occurs in all these ways of fracture where small parts are dislocated, like pieces of steel; and I shall speak about it.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of fractures by the distraction above them, and the examination with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on top of it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairy bump is recognized when, when one exposes the bone and scrubs above it, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's conditions, and if you see any harmful symptoms like vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, pain in the feet, high fever, hairs growing and reddening, and similar signs in various situations, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any harmful symptoms, and expect healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture first comes to you in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month when possible.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is a fracture, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents mentioned come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the fracture of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, you must split the broken part as follows: and it is to take hold of the patient's head, uncover the bone in all possible ways on its surface and around the wound more gently than you can, and if pus or abscess comes out when uncovering the bone, help yourself with what is needed, and it is to fill the area with damp cloth soaked in rose oil; then let the wound rest until the pus or abscess subsides, and be certain that no more pus comes out; then begin to remove the bone according to two ways of work: one way is to make a narrow cut ahead, and this is the shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then insert another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, sharp and pointed, made of iron indeterminate; and work lightly, so as not to pierce the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is dislocated and hard, you must pierce it around so as to provide relief with drills, but not to such an extent that they pass through the bone to the other side, and there should be a margin or circle on top of the point that does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you should have more than one, each arriving at its place on the edge of the bone, so you have drills for all sides; and this is the shape of the four types of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then remove the drill slightly, and do this all around, then chop out the space of the bone between the fractures as delicately and lightly as possible, as we have said, until you draw out the bone to your hand or any other tool you have such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the sharpness which has remained on the bone from any other similar instrument, but it should be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors; and if anything of the small bones or scales remains, gently remove them with the instruments; then treat the wound with cauterization and ointment as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks say, which is more secure; and they praise it highly, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you should cut open part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed that part, place the blunt-edged leech-shaped instrument on top.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 Do not cut it from one side, and let the parts be hollowed in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you lightly chip the bone all around, and take care of the cloth that is underneath; if it is adhered to the bone, gently remove it, for it is easily chipped badly without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone does not break through to the cloth, and the bone is only broken from above, there will be small pieces; in such a case, you must smooth it out, and remove the scales with a fine rasp, having various quantities, to provide the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If the king shaves before with great razors, and afterward with more subtle ones, and does not stop doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other haircut and subtle break, it is necessary that you bring the cause according to its direction; and this is not something that can be answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 And if the wound is open, you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, then place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled over once or twice, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; do this more lightly than possible, so as not to burden the wound, then administer through the other linen, but do not strain it more than necessary to only cover the wound; leave it like that for a day or two until the abscess has subsided, then remove it and administer medicines such as root of the lily, flour of wheat, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder and place it on the wound, and immediately administer trustworthy medicines without bitterness; and ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or bowel there, for when a bowel collects on the cloth of the head, it will corrupt and rot, causing great harm to the patient; for when something bitter is placed on the wound, it will cause pain through the skin.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful in sense.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness does not come violently except by the medicine that has been placed on it, which has this virtue, you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them with wax; then apply it in this manner; afterwards treat it according to the appropriate method until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is known that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or only one of them, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it twists or bends, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If one of the two parts is broken, you should eat your little finger or thumbnail, and put the broken part inside your index finger and against the nailbed, until the nail grows back according to its natural figure; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then you must equalize it to the tip of a thumb, a little bigger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If the broken part is of one of the two parts, do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day if possible; otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then apply linen bandages to the base of the nail where the broken part is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply one cloth to one side, if the fracture is there; and let the cloths be as thick as they fill the hollow of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said any remedy that the tents (bandages) should be softened with butter, and moistened every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It seems not to be good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the mixture of egg yolk and flour powder, then let the bandage, until the bone is hard and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers of an owl are inserted instead of tents, and if it is wrapped with a thin fabric, and held together, and the patient blows through it; then do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess is opened while you are working on it, put rose oil or cotton soaked in alum in it, or a drop of vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess does not open itself, put an ointment on the outside, made of flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light dressings on it and do not tie it too tight; and if the break in the bone is small and broken into small pieces, take suitable tools, then cut the wound, and treat it with things that heal quickly, such as ointments and poultices suitable for that; and if there is no injury inside the bone, cure it with bandages, and place cotton swabs until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	About the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated and there is no wound outside, and the break is only outside but not broken within, if one knows it easily, then it is recognized as a fracture of the corbel inside.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side of the lower jaw, place your index finger in the patient's mouth; if the fracture is on the left lower jaw, place your index finger of the right hand inside and push gently, then adjust it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	If the fracture of the lower jaw is displaced by 2 fingers, then you must provide an extension of 2 parts to make it even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or fracture, hold them with a filament of gold, silver or silk, then place a broken mandible in cotton and place one double cloth; and place on top of it a large and well-made cradle, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the jaw, and secure it at the mouth that you can, and command the patient to rest, and give light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes (dislocation), release it on the third day, then reset it to its original position; and place a plaster over it with milled powder with egg or flour of wheat, after removing the cotton; and put light linen plaster over it, and if the plaster sticks, remove it, and leave the patient until he is well; many times, it becomes well within four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes out (ruptures), bring what we have often said before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone when extracting it; use instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no more, stitch the wound if it is wide, and apply one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks multiple times towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, with fragments, and is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture accompanied by a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is when the fracture is accompanied by a wound, that you have two assistants, one should hold the shoulder where the force break is felt; and the other extends the neck towards the affected area; then align the fracture to your hands so that the form is as it should be, without any appearance or protrusion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you need to extend further, place a round cushion of fabric or linen under the shoulder of the patient, and let it be thick according to your needs; spread and lift the force break, then hold the cushion with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out by force because it comes in firmly, then the patient must lie on their affected side, and put an elbow pillow under the shoulder, and push the ministers down on the shoulder from below until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you see debris, then it is necessary that you cut above; pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, hit it in one of the incisions you made; but place this instrument under the shoulder blade to prevent it from spreading:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it appears like a spoon, and is not pointed, and should be as large as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and it should have two ends, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, just like the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain about the abscess, if the opening is large, then cut the wound, but if you doubt about the abscess, then use linen and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses are present, wet one linen cloth in rose oil and asafetida and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone when it has wounds and cuts is that you place the padding made from powdered millstone and eggshell on the bone, and place light splints above it, and put a spike beneath if necessary; then take a very broad bandage, one palm wide, then cover the splints with linen cloth and the padding; then take a thin strip of wood about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the end of the bandage hangs; and place the stick on the break, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the armpit, and under the patient's arm where the break is located; and tighten it from each side, and when you see that the ligament holds the break properly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, then check it every day, and when the linen unravels, tighten it; place the patient on his back, and put a small pillow beneath the armpit to lift the shoulder; the fracture will align itself by the alignment of the shoulder joint, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless a bad accident occurs, until 20 days have passed; then continue the padding, if needed, and tighten and leave it like this, until it is healed; and it is usually healed within 28 days, but in some men, less.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 It often happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated and only feels foreign when touched; if it appears according to the shape of the fracture, reset it according to its natural form in all ways you can; then put powder from a mill with much egg white, light bandages, and place it on a double cloth; then place a broad and fine stele, slightly larger than the shoulder, and where the stele is below any part of the shoulder, use linen stuffing to fill the gaps so that the stele fits evenly; and then tie it firmly with a great bandage so that the stele does not move from its place, and watch the ligament each day; and whenever it softens, tighten it again, and make the stele even if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. When this number is accomplished, release it, and be sure, for it is not just bone that becomes dislocated easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a part of the bone protrudes before and not beneath the skin, raise it up, pull out the bone, and perform as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to cool down the inflammation.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture with pus
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The limb is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks near the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken in the middle, it sinks downward, and the patient feels great pain, lack of support, and immediately vomits blood; the fractures open widely in the broken bones, and they hurt a lot.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is that the patient lies flat on his back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders and brings together the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and carefully adjusts it in every way possible, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then places plasters and bandages over the thin plate of salt or of another light substance, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the splint round at the back, and tightens it gradually, and every hour checks the splint, and if it becomes soft, tightens it again; and if it needs to be loosened, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat the one who has come there in methods of cure; then remove the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in large bones near the back and at the chest, and they bend only because they are slippery; and this is clear to all at the investigation in the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the reduction is that you put it back together as required.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then place the splint and hold it with a stick, if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is sinking downwards, the patient feels great pain and shortness of breath, as with pleurisy, for the bone pierces it; and the pain shoots to the point, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which swell the belly, to drive away the rupture (or break).
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We should not let hot abscesses come, if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let it be healed (or cured).
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that blisters should be put on the wound to drain pus, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the blisters will draw out the excess to the wound due to its weak condition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said to someone that the joint should be covered with damp linen in hot oil, and then a splint should be placed between the ribs to make it even on all sides, afterwards it should be cured with pleurisy cure, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure at the bone that is not covered by cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, you must cut above the level of the broken rib; then place an instrument below it to support it; afterwards, you must split the bone, remove gently, then sew together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when an abscess comes up, put oil-soaked wool on it, and place the heated iron on top; and cure the area that needs to be treated with the abscess, and let it lie on the side where it is, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the bones of the neck break and do not bend; similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when it happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, take care if you see their hands becoming soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is deadly in many positions, and if they are silent and feel well when they are pulled and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient should be healed if care is taken.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if something similar happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is hollow or not, take care if the feet are numb, and if there are accidents that are in hand, and on the back, it jumps spasmodically and moves against one's will; and when it has been laid on the stomach, it moves spasmodically against one's will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is laid on the back and wants to straighten, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is fatal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this does not happen, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to reward it if there is an abscess that is hot, place rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is soothed; then put one of the comforting and drying plasters on top, tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until it is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it must be covered with oil; then remove the bone, close the wound with stitches if it is large, or suture it; afterwards, apply a soothing ointment until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", put your left thumb on it and align it with the other hand as you can, then place the plaster and the splint, if necessary; then tighten it, and if there is more dislocation of the bone, lift it up, remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	The fracture of the shinbone (lower leg)
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It is seldom that the shinbone (lower leg) is fractured, and if it happens, there will be a slight reduction of swelling at the site; then make a long cut, lower the limb, and bring pain to the place, and puncture and inflate what was broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, while you are on the break; and recognize what the break is and its shape; and if the break is only in the head, then make the break equal to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it declines within, make the patient lie on his stomach so that the restoration of the break may be prepared for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, put a plaster on top of it, then place a stick of wood or horn over the break and hold the break so that it does not move; and apply the ligature under the ribs until the ligatures are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on a healthy side (or on the back).
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess arises, do not touch it until the abscess subsides, and put what we have previously mentioned on it; then return to treatment, tighten as necessary, if there is no bad incident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder breakage
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder (adjutoires) is between the neck and the arm of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods. One method is that you take a rod filled with thickened honey in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And let the two shoulders be bound with two straps, and place them above; then raise the patient on one seat; then throw his broken arm over the post, until it comes to rest, and have a brace of wood in place; then put the braces on opposite sides of his hands together, until the broken arm returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to lay the patient on his bed, tie his hand to his neck, and command two assistants that one holds the brace above his hands and the other holds both straps, each pulling towards their respective sides.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 If you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament under the break, and on top of the break, and extend each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place the splint underneath the joint and towards the breast, beneath the break; and similarly if the break is towards the breast, then you must gently place the splint, without labor, until the break is equal to the level and to the breast; then set the break evenly, as necessary, and hold it, unless an abscess swells.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And when an abscess swells up, do not tighten it at all for the first seven days; put soft linen cloth and rose oil on it to soothe the abscess; then tighten it. The method of tightening is that you place the cup over the fracture, then raise the arm towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; place a bandage, and tighten towards the shoulder and towards the arm, so that the arm is in its socket, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints and place a wider and stronger splint over the fracture, leaving one inch of space between each splint, and make each splint large enough to pass around the fracture two inches on either side; then tighten the splints towards the fracture, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, more tightly but not pulling them apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 If you see the setting of the bones and the binding, as we have said, when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then observe every third day the binding, so that pus does not swell or come to the place, or the nails cannot reach the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the bandage for more than three days or longer, let the patient lie on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder a cushion filled with equal linen, and observe every hour of the day or night whether the figure of the broken limb moves or if the ligaments become soft; and if it does not move or become weakened by the medicine's power, give him the meat that we have previously mentioned in such a way that the meat is first made subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it grow thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be held in place for 40 days; then they must be unbandaged, and a bath and ointment administered to straighten them.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the structure is deformed and swollen, it remains to dissolve for days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius". Sometimes only the larger one (the ulna) is broken, or sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When small fractures are broken, the restoration is easy and healing; but when large ones are broken, it is a difficult healing, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small fracture that is broken, it must be slightly extended and made level.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large fracture, it must be pulled harder; and stretch over the splint, and press the heel of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the others, and the patient should cross his arms on himself, and the splint above him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then the ministers extend their arms to the part under the patient's hand or elbow, and one minister on the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then make the mirror equal, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the bones are broken into pieces, place each one in its place, and if there is any dislocation that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if it (the dislocation) is caused by a break (fracture), I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; take the treatment for it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 If at the beginning of treatment abscesses swell up, apply a plaster made of rose oil and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and stick the plaster gently over it until the abscesses are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the plaster, and apply the splint made of powder from the mill with plenty of egg, then set the bones; make the bone-breaking splint stronger at the break than the others, and a little larger in size; and be aware that it should have six bone-breaking splints or arms in multiple positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and tighten more on the break than elsewhere, and always less in alignment, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and may the plasters over the break be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and may the thread used for binding be flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And keep the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any bad accident comes to the member, such as itch that comes to the member, then you must irrigate the member with hot water, until the itching is soothed; and let the member not be allowed to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then continue with the ligament tightening, and if the ligaments are crushed and bones dislocated, and similar things, advise accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for some days until the urine passes, and then hold it in place.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen it for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 If it is around these things that we have said which come to the patient, then he should put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; and know that this break will be restored in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that there are few breaks at the back of the hand and the fingers, but it only happens multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cross his hands equally in front of him; then he places his hand on an extended cloth, and extends the broken bones, aligns them to each other as much as possible, and binds them with splints until they are well joined; then applies plaster and padding, unless an abscess comes, then puts a needle according to the size of the wound; and is wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is around the sides of the sole of the foot, make a bandage from cloths, and instruct the patient to tighten it on his broken sole; then tighten a long cloth around it, and the needle of caution should be as large as the sole of the hand, and tighten it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the outer side (of the bone), then you must place a splint above and another one below in the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it all around the hand tightly, and press down on the joint between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the break occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the pulp, you should align it as necessary; and hold with the sole and if you see that you put a straight small splint to lift the break and not move; and if the break is at other fingers such as the index or one of the others, you should align it and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or bind all together in one bandage, which is better, or put a splint on top as with a pulp; and pay attention to the restoration and the position of the abscess, and care for those who come, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	broken ankle
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the shin are often broken, and it can be seen when it turns in front or behind; and restoration is as follows: one ligament above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each minister extends his ligament evenly to its part; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, it should be one of the ligaments towards the knee, and the other ligaments below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 If it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be below the knee and the extensor tendon above; then arrange the bones equal to each other as they were naturally, and then apply a splint and a bandage, unless an abscess comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that is heated (boiled), let it cool down first, then return to your work and your care; the lancing is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 You must wrap above the break with a thick bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave any excess, then turn the leg so that the heels are at the root of the thigh, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the ends of the thread above; then turn the leg and the bandage upwards, then put splints on the break, and a splint on the bone of the leg; then stretch the joint using fabric soaked in wax for about eight inches between the leg and the thigh to equalize the straining, then start tying three or four turns above the break; and as you go up from the break, loosen the tension; then take two threads that you have passed between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return to below the thread, all the way to the foot; tighten so that it does not move from its place, then leave it, unless an abscess or swelling or any such thing comes out.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If a piece of the bone protrudes (pokes out), you should dislocate it and direct it where it comes from, as we have said many times; if it cannot be cut with an instrument, then you must break the limb and pull out the marrow; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are set, as in the shoulder or arm; however, the restoration does not cause discomfort to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thigh is restored within one or two days, or slightly more or less, according to the individual's complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street of the kneecap
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the thigh bone there is little breakage, but it often bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not so much a break as a fracture or wound, causing pain at all levels and greatly affecting the patient.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: one puts equal heat to the joint which is cold at its ends, as long as it can be assembled; then place the plaster, and put a round stick if needed, and hold it as necessary, then check all the positions that we have said in other dislocations, such as an abscess or any similar thing; for each accident, one puts whatever is needed until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called "ham bone," and the other is called "shinbone"; they both break in the same way as the arm does, and for this reason, restoration is similar to that of the arm; the operations are also the same. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and is visible; it also bends under.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Therefore extend it and make it even, and tie the joints equally; however, if the break is misshapen and there are more pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; align it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fists of straw that compress the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the length of the leg from the knee to under; then wrap in two layers of linen, both inside and outside, and tie it in the middle so that the leg will not decline to right or left, and this is good; and no one should apply one splint the length of the leg, and if it is made of straw, and place the leg for immobilization, and properly make it at the break where there is a wound; and move the leg every day to see if there is any abscess or other accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at times the bones of the foot suffer fractures and the toes also, and there is no cure except for surety in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones moving against each other, place the patient on his feet on the ground, just as if he wants to walk, then put your foot on his, where the bones have been raised, and press them until they return to their place; then apply a splint and padding, and place a small table under the foot with two flat pieces, then bind it around the foot in the correct position, after you have covered it with bandages and other things that are needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandages, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two [bones] are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones in the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and it should be a bit larger, then place beneath it the flat piece that I mentioned, and hold it in position; and if there are two or more, or more, break each bone, place a splint on each bone covered with one linen cloth, and hold the flat piece beneath the bone; and let it remain above the head of the flat piece facing the abdomen of the bone, so that it covers it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I said about other fractures, when we have spoken of them; and treat each case according to its necessity.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of the womb is broken, make it swell by applying heat, then incline it towards the small of the back and hold it from behind; fill the nature of the patient with cotton and place a large pad over it; then turn the woman, lift her hips slightly, and pull on the pad until it reaches the entrance of the womb, and the bone returns with the pad; when she wants to urinate, remove the pad, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the break will heal, and if you see, take a bladder of barley straw, attach a tube to one end, and blow into the other end until the straw is swollen inside; the bone will return to its place; then fill with cotton, and leave it for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the thumb in a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the wrist-bone; and these nearby breaks are not concealed from him who puts his study and practice into it and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 The broken bone signifies various positions for the correct path of restoration; therefore, let us discuss it further.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, put a goose's gullet around it, then wrap cloths around it and leave for 3 days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	With break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has a break with wound, especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, that it be cauterized now, so that the cauteries which we have said bear witness to its healing.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, anoint it with vinegar, if you have none, then begin to restore the break in the same hour, or the next day, if abscess pus does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscess pus comes, wait until the ninth day, until the pus is calmed, and do not touch it for three or four days, because you will cause bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and appears exposed at the edge of the wound, you should set it gently with your hands to a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the fracture is not aligned for you to set it evenly with your hands, you should align it with this instrument made of iron, which has 7 or 8 inches in length, and the width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror that he takes hold of 3 or 4, according to what is required in each treatment of fracture; and it should be round and slightly larger than needed, so it does not fold under pressure on the member in your work, and sharp before, and large from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called the "wrist-bone", so the crooked shoulder should be placed over the visible bone; and push it once until it returns, and make sure they are even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you must saw the head of the bone until the instrument has enough power to hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your ability; then carve away the part that remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Keep it in its place, then moisten the cloth with black stiptic wine if it is hot and do not put any oiled cloth or anything else on the wound that could cause pus or corruption; afterwards administer splints when you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, cover it as necessary according to the size of the wound, take care not to strain the wound with the break; many times the foolish physician has done this and brought harm upon the patient or death or sometimes rottenness; and let the bandage be softer and more flexible than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad event may come, as we have said, and you feel pain at its place, do not put stitches on it; but wrap around it, in place of stitches, hard bandages and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one or two days that the bandage has become soft at the wound, take off what you put on and apply healing ointment for wounds, like tetraformula ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, at morning and evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be set in such a way that the bone protrudes slightly downwards gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but rather protrudes again, as you know there are small fragments of bone, for this reason, it is necessary that you try to press the wound, and remove all those dislocated fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 If a fistula or any form of corruption comes at the place, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 If the bone is broken and opened on the limb, like the bone of the leg or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, because many times death comes, but leave it until it can set; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The buboes (swellings caused by infection) coming upon the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Often times after the breaking of health, it happens especially near the joint, and it is a sight to behold the appearance of the limb; and by chance, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take care if it is fresh: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sycamore bark, acacia, and similar others, either taking one of these things or all together, and grind them with sharp vinegar or egg white or honey; then place the mixture in a stoppered jar, strain it well, and do not let it out for many days; then drain it, and start another, until the swelling is gone; or you can use a well-made piece of plank, as the property of the plank is that it removes all inflammation from the limbs. If the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, it needs to be removed, either by chopping it off, and making the excess apparent; or you can shave it, until it is removed, and heal it when it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed and remains afterwards, the limb becomes weak and delicate for several reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, but not sufficiently as required; or because there were too many ligaments, preventing nourishment to reach the limb; or due to excessive soaking; or due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	The treatment is to have the patient eat well and make his body lean, until the blood multiplies within him; administer baths and give joy and comfort; then apply tar to the limb so that the tar attracts great nourishment, and soak it often with cold water, until nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after being restored and the bones are broken open and the shape of the limb is disfigured, do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the limb anew and many fools have done this in our land; and this practice is condemned, and it brings great harm, and possibly death. However, if the swellings and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with warm water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, roots, medlots, and similar things; and you make a soothing poultice, like dyaquilon well made, and take musk root of vismalve and mix it with ginger oil or sesame oil, and make a poultice on top; or you take fat figs, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that alleviate the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Bring movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is enlarged and hardened, as a stone, and it requires iron removal, it must be covered up to the bone, making an incision with a subtle, delicate knife; and put cotton and bandage in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be returned without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if you wait, the joint swells, and in case it is reset again at the same place; therefore, it should not be moved when swollen: many times this brings spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, let the patient purge, then rest, until all abscesses are calmed; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently straighten it, and treat each member as the cure comes in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It seldom happens that the jawbones are dislocated in both places, and dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are partially displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the side, and the saliva flows from the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a small dislocation returns through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it without delay; and in this manner that the servant holds the head of the patient, and puts a thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be spread out, to make it even; and command the patient to soften its jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirrors [should be "patient"] align it [the dislocation] evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jaw bones are dislocated together, warm them with hot water and oil, moving them gently; do not force them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they (the dislocated joints) are put back in place, and the patient's mouth is closed well with soft linens sewn into a purse made of rose oil and wax, then gently tie it with several ties; let the patient sleep on his back, with his arms between two cushions so that they do not move to either side or try to force themselves, but take light food until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are healed; then eat lightly whatever one wishes, and do not strain oneself by opening the mouth to eat or drink, until the jawbones are well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be set correctly within an hour and are not converted to their places, fever and customary sweats come, and possibly abdominal swelling and perhaps vomiting of clear mucus.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times the person who experiences this dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the collarbone
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot be dislocated from its continuous connection with the chest and the breast, but it is occasionally dislocated at the end, and this can be felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; then press the joint firmly towards your palm, and it will return; then put on a sling and bind it; the shoulder which was dislocated toward the front cannot dislocate again; if not, and if it dislocates once, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on a sling and bind it, and tell the patient to rest until he is sound; in the same way, the shoulders of the back are restored when they are dislocated from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder can only be dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the joint below the socket, and the second is at the joint of the hip; it occasionally dislocates above the joint, but this happens rarely; it does not dislocate behind the shoulder nor inside the nerves; it often dislocates below the socket towards the hip, especially for those with little muscle strength, as it can happen quickly; for those with enough muscle strength, it jumps up slightly and goes back in slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, happens to some men percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess hot, and thinks that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must verify it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that the dislocations are towards the hip and distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and at the top of the shoulder, you will find a hollow, and below the hip near the shoulder tip, as if it were an eye socket; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its place nor make any movements; similarly, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you can feel it clearly at the shoulder tip; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, unless the patient is weak.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the servant lifts the patient's hand upwards, then puts your thumbs under the elbow, and forces the joint upward to its place; then the servant lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, put it back in place; it will come out quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in many days, the patient should be bathed in hot water; and apply softening and soothing balm, such as decotion of elder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it; then lay the patient on his back, and place a piece of linen equal in size but not too soft nor too hard under the affected shoulder, then place the heel of the person on the piece of linen, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull the arm of the patient; and another person should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; that shoulder will immediately return to its original position, and if you notice that it dislocates in this way: and make sure there is someone present who is larger than the patient; and straight towards his side, push the affected shoulder under the patient's affected shoulder, and lift the patient's affected shoulder upward, so that the patient hangs on the crossbar; and another person pulls the patient's arm downward towards his stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too light, one cannot perform any weighty action with him, for the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 It is also done in another way: one pierces the long thorn into the ground so that the head is as round as a pea, neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but with wool underneath to protect him, and the patient should lie down straight on the staff; then his hand should be extended across from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; if it does not want to return due to all the things that we have said, do this cure: take a large-thick tiron with a four-inch wide base, which has a rounded tip to enter fully into the wound, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place the head of the tison on the sick man's joint, so that it does not burn the patient, then put it into the joint of the sick person; extend one arm above the tison, and hold the shoulder above the tison, and the hand at the end of the arm, then place the arm on a wooden wedge of a width equal to four fingers, and stretch out the other hand downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will be reset immediately.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, however it may be, you must put a cloth equal to the joint underneath the joint, then apply a plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white all over the shoulder and around, then hold it under the joint as it moves, and twist the thread around the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be eaten little by little, as long as the members are comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and afterwards eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is closed up and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or for some other reason, you must administer three cauterizations as stated in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold, and the arm above cannot be lifted, then understand that the nerve at the base of the shoulder is cut or stretched or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the hip or the backside is made by force and extension of hands, and another instrument is used for it; treat it until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, the member has pain and sluggishness in movement, the patient should take baths many times until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost   (This line doesn't make sense as it is, the translation provided above suggests that "de" is a preposition in this context but "dislocation" is a noun and it should be translated as "of the dislocation". However, "coute" seems to be missing from the sentence. The original text might be incomplete or missing information.)
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated at points, and it dislocates at points again; if it has been dislocated in all directions, both front and back, and dislocation cannot be corrected because it can clearly be seen and felt, as each dislocation displaces according to its shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the healthy bone with the sick one, make sure you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it should be reset in such a way that abscesses do not come where the joint is, because if abscesses come where the joint is, it would be difficult to set; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset from all sides, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and possibly death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such, when it can be brought back to its place, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands around the mirror as necessary, above and below, and push the jointure towards their peaks together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If the dislocation is in front, then return when you bend your hand to your hand, and press from the root of the palm on the dislocated side.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 If it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two people should extend the arm and hold it still during the extension; then turn the arm on both sides, when you have rolled up a double-length and wide cloth; and when the person puts his hand on the joint, oil it for softening the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns; and when it is in its place, apply dry plaster with egg, and hold it firmly, and let the arm hang from the neck of the patient for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint is not holding well, renew the plaster and the bandage, leaving it in this state for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if it feels pain after the resetting of the joint and it swells, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put a sheep's wool on the jointure, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, let it enter water; and when it bleeds, rub the jointure gently, then replace the wool, and then enter it into water again; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, put warm damp sheep's wool on it, and apply pressure; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand's joint, and its reset is easy compared to other jointures; it must be returned to its place promptly, in the same hour when it is dislocated, unless the ligaments are inflamed, or there comes an abscess hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the resetting of the hand, you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and align the hand, so that it is placed with the palm above the appearance of the jointure, and push until it goes back into place; it is necessary that you observe whether it is properly in position; then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on the table, and the observer should put his hand above that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, it is good; if not, hold down the plasters that soothe abscesses with heated irons and let it heal on its own.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if it cannot be endured and you cannot put it back after some days, the dislocated joint remains twisted; and it does not harm the patient for as long as his hand is injured and he cannot exert any force: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or arteries; there is no other means except to straighten through cautery in the case, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is injured, place it in the plaster that we have mentioned, then stretch and leave for 5 days, then remove the bandage and leave as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, apply warm water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the belly; then you push the dislocation towards your pockets until it returns, then hold the head of the finger and turn it towards the part where it is disjoined; and leave it for two days, and then make it even on that day; and bind it, as we have said, and loosen the binding for a day, and make it move, and bind it again; and do this often, until it is tight, and similarly do, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done above, until it heals; and similarly do, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	And also do the same for the dislocation of the backbone in the spine.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the backbone in the spine or neck is dislocated, or there are many dislocations, there is no cure for it, as death quickly comes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are that the hernias leap voluntarily, cannot be held, and many times the member becomes softened, or in the two legs or the two arms or the neck; many times the spleen becomes silent in four parts; this which becomes silent at the rear is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you observe if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if it has not had any treatment or healing since.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And that which has fallen out or from blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure spoke in large words, but there was not much benefit in all cases; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the swelling that comes before, there is no trick or health; and similarly, the one that comes directly between the two sides, and cannot be cured except by the one who comes from behind, as I said; and it is that the patient lies extended on his face in one place, and has a bandage under him, so that he does not bleed; then insert the needle into the main wound on the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a rope over the patient's body, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two attendants know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two needles; and they should be well tied, the needles as we have said, and the healer places his hands on the spine erect until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if it does not return by this cure, take a table three arms long and hollowed out beneath, and the patient should be on their side; and push the head of the table underneath the opening, then place the middle part of the table on the spine; and put mirrors on each end of the table, and press hard, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it on the pulley that rotates by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then you stick two needles in the head of the patient with one arm's length apart, and between each needle, have a space of palm width; and in each needle have a hole, or let the pulley move, and ensure the needles are firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between the two needles have a rotating needle, like liens, and have in the two rotating needles two small needles with palm width length, to turn the pulley; then tie the rope that is among the handles to the pulley towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet at the other pulley, and each of the assistants turns their pulley to the entire rope, and the master ensures the spine is level as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it [the shoulder] is in alignment, place a drying plaster containing much egg white on it, then press it, then place the rod of a three-foot table, pressing the dislocated area and the healthy part of the vertebrae, then tie a cord around it as we have said, and use the patient with gentle manipulation until it is healed; and if anything comes at the end of the healing process, administer softening and soothing medicines, with the rod mentioned above; and sometimes a piece of plank is administered, and sometimes the appearance comes at the back vertebra of the spine, and it is believed that this is dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, for which reason there should be no presumption: perhaps death will come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the neck and the shoulder come undone only by dislocations, not in any other way; and the joint of the neck is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and it dislocates more on the inside, and less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and the sick person's knee joint is more open than the healthy one; and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire; and it is the joint that is displaced swollen with abscess hot, because the head of the shinbone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who it comes to flee, is that this event is contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him whose leg it is in front, are that it should be well aligned according to the completion; however, do not double the knee with pain, and if you want to make it walk, it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him whose back it is, are that he cannot extend his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at the place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are that you examine if the dislocations are old and remain in their position without treatment; no treatment should be assumed for them, nor should there be any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In the case of fresh dislocations, which are of four types of dislocation, hurry and try to re-align the joint and push it inward and outward, moving it from side to side; by chance if it returns, no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong minister and hold the leg firmly between his hands or with a rope tied above the knee; another minister should extend his hand in such a way that he pushes his hands beneath the shins, then tightens a strong rope around the shin; another person holds the head of the rope; and all extend upwards and downwards together at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground once and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similar situations, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If the joint is not in place, treatment is required for its appearance. When dislocation is at the front, you must remember to lift the patient on their unaffected side, then tie a rope around the thigh's root and the dislocated area under the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and towards the forceps; then take another attendant with their arms, embrace the large thigh of the affected limb, and extend it outwards; the joint will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient tightly with a strong rope around both ankles and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers more than the others; then hang him by the head from a pole, and suspend two long arms above ground; then command one attendant to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another attendant hold the patient while embracing the thigh in turn, as the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down, as we said in the one with gout, and pulls the ligament above the affected leg properly, and also above the foot; then put two splints, one at the top and the other at the feet, then insert the splint between the knees of the patient in the appropriate position; and wrap it with moistened cloths so as not to burn the patient, then extend each assistant towards him, and the mirrors adjust his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If it does not return, place him on a bed and press as we said in the case of gout, and let the patient lie down on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	When the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and as I have said; place the patient's pain on the opposite side, then press with the other hand and pull it back towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is to the outer side, it should not extend the patient downwards nor raise up on the earth, but rather it should remain as if the hip was dislocated to the outer side, as we have said in bed position on both hips; and it should be on his back, and the leg extended as we have said before, and must press upon the jointure on the table; and he will be at rest when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then align the thighs, and place the bolster, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then unbind, and place the bolster again; and if you see that they are even, bind again as before, and let it rest for three days; then unbind, and make him walk well when the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation at the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in four ways: inside and outside, behind; it should not be dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and place his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your hands, pull it between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee together; another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends easily at the knee lightly; apply the poultice, and hold the leg to the thigh, and let them heal together firmly for three or four days, then release it; do not let the patient walk until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not at its proper place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it tends towards the part where it is dislocated: the repositioning should be gentle, and it should be gently extended to its hands when it has been loosened only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the leg by the ankle with one hand above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, then lift the foot up, and push the foot up hard; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start again, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and fix the splint firmly in the ground between his knees, and wrap bandages around to prevent the patient from bleeding; then hold the leg by one hand, and another person holds the foot at the ankle or the shin, so that it lies above the ankle of the foot; then each person should extend equally, and the splint should be close between the knees of the patient to keep the patient still when he is lifted; then the mirrors place their hands equally on the dislocation, and another person holds the leg straight below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is ready, place the plaster and wool on top of it, and press firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle, so the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, tighten it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient walk for four days; and if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess swells there, you must drain it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	the two (hands)
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both hands are dislocated, they must be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any way between the back of the foot and the ankle, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or bed straight up, and put your foot on top of where the joints open, then press firmly on the foot until it aligns; and when it is even and there is no gap, place two fingers under the sole of the foot, then tighten it, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in the cure, unless you are wise in the art and have long used it, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, but not rash; and first use soothing medications on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, reset the limb to its place, provided that the abscess soothes itself; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing medications to the abscess and treat the wound as required, using cauterized ointments; and if there is a fracture with dislocation, and small bones are dislocated, set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for this will harm you according to your Creator, and for the sake of the knowledge of your weapon and body.
Amen	 Amen (In the name of God)
