O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I have completed this book for you, my very dear son, which is the end of the knowledge of medicine along with its fullness, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is corrupted in our region and is foreign to everyone in everything, science and learning perish and are destroyed, and there remains nothing of them except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have altered.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this [comes] error and vanity; intentions are closed off and knowledge is driven away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I shall revive [it] together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, as well as other tools for work, along with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good craftsmen are found in our times, the art of medicine has become distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who undertakes it should be summoned in the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of members, and their shapes and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and their movement and those that move and those that rest, and the direction of their outflow.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name without work is nothing, and the same applies to the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, should be careful so as not to err and not to harm people; in such a way that I have seen many times that those who engage in this science and abandon their science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula or the throat of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who drew a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; with it he carried away a piece of the bladder, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it, he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another physician who took care of one of the duke of our land, who had his leg broken and with the break came an injury; and the physicians, full of ignorance, pulled the break over the wound by strong force, and did not leave any splint on the wound, but let it be thus set; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated again; and it remained so until the leg became completely swollen and the toes and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I dislocated it, it was peaceful and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And another eye that collapses an abscess and then inflames it through the evil of its dominion.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when the chancre is purged of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in a place where all can be removed that is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Because of this it is necessary for you to protect yourselves so that the foolish people cannot speak ill of you; take up arms in caution, and approach your patients gently but firmly, and use the best method so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave aside diseases that are hopeful of great healing; and remove from yourself the weapons that cause doubt, and have faith within you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen advised in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on bad disease, lest you be called a foolish healer.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and the cauterization of medicine for ague, and it is arranged from head to toes; and about the shapes of instruments, and the devices for cauterizing, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and abscesses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is arranged and the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from head to toes, and about the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember our work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid, and the harm, is the longest and most subtle speech and secret responses; and many wise men spoke of it, and agreed with this; and they relied little on their words, because I will reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, whether it be of the two complexions: hot with matter and dry with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry complexion, some people said that cautery is great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery has no value for disease caused by heat and drought.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to treat hot diseases with heat or drought; and this is what those who said the opposite claim: that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases in humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	If you understand the body of a man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find it cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it sometimes through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere unless one who has tested it, and who knows through long experience the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and space of time; we have no fear from other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all should submit themselves to the cautery treatment.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater kindness than cauterization with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not harm any other member except the one it touches.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medical treatments cause illness in one member by moving from another, and they bring diseases of severe affliction to the sickened limb; and it happens that fire kills the patient due to its high temperature and the goodness of its substance, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have discovered this for you through experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into my art, and it is true concerning the things; therefore, I apologize for the length of the words, for I do not wish to deprive you of the secret which concerns fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives off diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; accept this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be performed and chose their companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is suitable in all times, because the harm occurring is kept under control by the aid of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauteries are necessary for pain relief, it cannot be postponed until a more serious illness comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for a disease cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes complexion, but rather dries humors causing pain, and works more quickly than other medicine due to its power and its virtue.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	It is possible that the disease sometimes comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and superfluidities are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity or moisture, as in cauterization for pain, and similar things; but this does not happen often.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the end of medicine, but it is true; however, they do not believe that cauteries are more effective after other medicines, but their belief is false; cauteries are the last resort in medicine because when we administer methods of cures for any disease and they are not effective, then we administer cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they said this not because of the quality of gold or the highness of its substance; but rather they claimed that the tips of cauteries do not produce pus, but it is not true since I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know if it is hot by the color of gold, and sometimes it cools down quickly; and if you heat it too much, it burns; and thus there are many impediments to this.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have instructed you on this chapter about the head from the neck to the feet, because the path is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for both hot and cold conditions of the brain, and it is used due to a disease known as "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and because of numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and most importantly, for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a medicinal solution, clearing the head four times or twice, according to what the qualities and age and condition of the sick person can tolerate; and then you make an incision at the back of the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands and put his hands on something; afterward, place the base of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will meet, it bleeds from there. Then heat the cautery called "olivare," which is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the place marked with ink, and do so while pressing and pulling your hand little by little, turning it over; then lift your hand immediately if you see the bone sticking out a little bit; if you don't see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; afterwards take a piece of silk, put it in warm water and soft cotton inside, put it on the place, and leave it for three days; afterwards put a thin linen cloth soaked in butter on it; leave it there until the burn is healed; afterwards heal the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, when an overwound (or ulcer) remains open longer, it drains more; and for this reason, let it be dressed (treated).
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that the cautery (treatment involving fire) should be allowed to burn a part of the bone and then the burnt part of the bone should be removed and healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery (treatment involving fire) should be applied strongly so as to break the bone as wide as one vertebra that women put in their vaginas because the humors issue out more freely; and then the wound should be left open for a long time; after that, it should be healed and bandaged.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two types of cauteries do not seem good to me in all respects, except for certain people who have fear; and it seems to me that I should let them be; because the heads are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other limbs; and even when the head of the patient is naturally weak, the first appearance of cautery seems more healing and beneficial to me, and in this way, I work for the sake of safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the head has chronic and long-lasting pain, the patient should use ear drops and pills called "cochie," and purge of the head, oils, and plasters; and if one performs cautery on it as we have said before, it is of no value.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize beneath it with that fire cautery as we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Perform cauterization on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform one cautery or treatment called "vasselz"; it is one of the two in which ventouses are placed; hold your hand so you do not see beyond the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak more about it later; and the cauterizations on the horns should be subtler than those used for the middle of the head, and this is their form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eyes, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases are performed but none help; then cauterization is done according to two methods: namely, with hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with hot medicine is that you take an onion and peel the skin off it, and put one piece of onion at each eye where the pain is, in such a way that you can place the onion under the skin; and when it is placed, press it well and leave it for twelve hours; then remove the onion and treat the area with salt for two or three days, and then cover it with linen dipped in butter as long as it lasts.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the onion treatment until it is healed; and if you see that this does not help, perform one of the treatments with burning medicines that I have written or the tenth treatment for burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery should be used in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery according to its shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a claw or has one and a half inches of curvature, and it is medium-sized with a small appearance; place it on the painful spot, hold your hand firmly and slightly tap the iron, so that half the thickness of the tip is burned; lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, and draw out the abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on a piece of linen, place it for four days; then put damp cotton in vinegar, and then treat the spot with ointment until it heals; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the iron called "cultellare", prick it entirely, but be careful not to pierce the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	From migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migraine as previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit from the cauteries mentioned in medicine and iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and so place it on the side of the temple along a line of half a finger's length, and press once with your hand, but do not cover the artery nor let the pressure reach the bone; protect the jawbone from mute people when they eat, and let the veins have no regard for the mute and prevent spasmus from coming to the patient, and protect against discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when cutting have great fear and especially to those who do not know, and are unstudied and inexperienced; leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the flow of blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it on the head as previously mentioned, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from coldness and it has been treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery called 'poins', which is made as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing the affected ear all around, or in both places where the pain is located, move away slightly from the root of the ear once you have marked the place to be treated; have ten points around each ear; treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torment to be cured by cautery is not foreign to those that move from flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cautery on the similar cases that come from scorch and from spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this similar torment that stops flux from the ears and cleansing of the head and gargarism, and this does not suffice, then you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little distance away from the temple, and the third at the corner of the lips; place the cautery in the open healthy part and make it cauterize towards the top of the ear slightly below the skull, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery stay until half of the coal is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the surgeon's tool that we have mentioned, but it is somewhat more delicate and requires the knife to be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, let it heal when it becomes healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauterizations: two on the top of the forehead, one in the skull, and one at the vessel called "vasselz" as I have previously mentioned, and the last cauterization on the stomach's mouth; let them be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	diarrhea
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large years and round pills to the brain; after that, anoint the head of the patient all over, and place the plaster of mustard (made from sinapi) on top of the occipital bone. This is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this manner, it is good; and if not, make four cauteries on the head descending from neck to collarbone, and have space between each cautery of two large ones; and cure as with others, and if you see it heal, give one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure until it is healthy; and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the chill in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head (of the patient) be cleaned with years and whatever was said before; after cleaning the patient's head, then make the cautery in the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if there is a need for more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most painful spot is burned, then remove your hand; afterwards, cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" that was said before be used.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are febrile, and it is necessary first to clean the brain with years and other treatments as was said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargling and chewing frequently with soft food; afterwards, put the head in a millstone, and apply 1 cautery as described before, and 1 cautery on the fontanelle, and on each cornea; and if the patient is weak and tolerant, apply cauteries as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped as I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, apply a gentle cautery in the following manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the superfluidity is declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what was mentioned before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place the patient cross-legged; then make a linen bandage well made, like a circle, and put it around the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly from all sides; after this apply the liner, and rub with old butter; and heat it gently at fire so that it can be applied without causing discomfort to the patient; afterwards remove the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with good management, until they are well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you wish to perform cauterization, make multiple pricks throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterizing aggravates the brain greatly; then place moist cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more often while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards, command him to rest his head and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two cauteries on the temples where the eyelid swelling is on both eyes or one eye; and pierce all the veins and arteries that are under the eyebrow, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it with your power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the incision the cautery how to stop it; and sometimes they make a fire cautery or heat something under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the body (translated from Old French)
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the eyes become old and accustomed to being on the veins, or from the arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and it is seen that this is due to cold phlegmatic superfluities, then let him perform the cautery as I have said at the beginning of the chapter, namely: cautery in the head, two cauteries on the temples, two cauteries or cauterizations under the eyes, and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The tears of the body within the eyes (translated from Old French)
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, but it does not help, then give a sick person three nux vomica (poison nuts); after that, roast the head and do a olive oil cautery or millet cautery; and make two cauterizations called "clavilis" over the two sores, one beneath the hair; be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called “clavilis”:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, then perform the cauterization with this cautery known as "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to perform two cauterizations on the two sorcerers who are as long as sorcerers are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair of the oils are transformed into a burn and prick the oil, and one performs cauterization in two ways: either by fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown even and long, then place the patient on a paper with the hairs marked out in the shape of the myrtle leaf, and begin the sign at the base of the hairs; then put damp cotton soaked in egg white and mustard oil on the oil, then heat the cautery to this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing over the marked shape repeatedly, so that the edges are burned; and the signs of the cure's success are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and let it be for four days, then put damp cotton in butter until the cautery is removed; afterwards heal with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs grow, and the paper is softened, then repeat the fire cautery on the same place as before; and if the hairs are curved, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position and even, and the hairs do not prick oil out.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot cautery in medicine is to instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make parchment of the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot metal, one ounce of each, grind them together well; and do this quickly, so it does not cool; then spread on the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put the parchment over the hairs; if the sickness only has one oil drop, work with one, and if in both; put cotton dampened with egg white underneath the oil; and the shoulder of the patient should be healthy and your finger should be on top showing the medicine, and press once and move it all each time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it bites like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done that for a long time, remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 When the biting is passed, raise the limb upwards, and turn it back so that you see the paper lifted in the same way as it was lifted by fire constraint or incision; and if it is thus, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is not thus, put more medicine on the limb or if the medicine has not worked, until your efforts are equal and your eyes placed at the right point; then place moist cotton soaked in butter over the burn until the sores are healed, after which cure the limb with the ointment called "dyafenis" and another, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you have to keep watch over your work carefully, so that no medicine leaks out from the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes wet afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the medicine on that place which has been moistened properly by the paper, as you did before; after cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the herb fennel:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hair of men is diverse in size and smallness, and according to this you should adjust your treatments; and do not deviate from the correct way for those who are studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have said in the classification of diseases and your treatment does not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in a basin of warm water or near hot coals, and have the assistant hold the patient's head between their hands so it does not move or shake; after putting cotton moistened with egg white or soap and oil on the fistula, heat the cautery to the required temperature, making it shaped like the tip of a feather and attached to the cautery. If you wish, the cautery can be pointed from one side to the other, or as wide as a tent; but regardless, the former is more suitable for your task.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it and remove the scab; after placing the hot cautery on top, hold your hand on the cautery to the affected area near the oil, being careful not to make a mistake; place the cautery in the oil and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you go to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, repeat the cautery again and another time, and leave it for three days; then put cotton wool soaked in butter on it, and apply the drying ointment until it is healthy, and if forty days have passed and it is still not healthy, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king follows this according to his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 For fistula, and open the wound; then put in the fissure the camphor substance that is formed here:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the amount of one piece of lead; hold your hand firmly with camahan, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted lead flows into its hole; it is necessary to put oil on the patient's cotton soaked in egg yolk or butter: the lead will heal the fistula and the wound miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 And if not, you must administer hot poultice and return the fistula to the warm body as it should be in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cavities in lips called "hair", and even in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When curing these cavities as we have said in sections, and the cure is not effective, then heat. I.e., a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put him immediately into those cavities until he comes to the font; afterward, treat the wound with lime until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it becomes pus-filled and grows and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after letting out or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at the source of it, and where the end is; and do this once or twice, after curing what we have said in treatments, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The double movement of teeth (or teeth grinding)
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the head of the patient in hot water; afterwards, apply a heated cautery to the tooth in this manner: put a cane on the tooth; and insert the heated cautery quickly, keep your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; after releasing your hand, continue the cauterization according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and bind it tightly for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the moving tooth is fixed and the gums are kept soft and moistures dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or fever, and the medicines do not help, then there should be need of cautery according to two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; after that take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, then wet it in boiled butter and apply it immediately to the painful tooth and hold it until it cools down; repeat this often until its property reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the linen and cotton getting cold in the boiled butter, apply it again, but heat one hot iron next to the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a copper or iron cane and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cauter, its form will come after, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 The patient should fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of the cautery and then suck out the juice; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	3. And make the cautioner at whichever place you wish, and according to your ability; and this is the shape of the rod.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrophulas are of pus and cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery as described below, and provide it with openings for the smoke to issue from the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess wherever necessary until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the pus is drained; after that, cleanse the affected area with ointments and unguents until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When moisture conquers on the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards perform cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to go up as far as the throat, and do not apply too much heat but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards perform another cautery at the junction of the neck and the spine, and make sure the "clavicle" cautery is in the shape we have described earlier; and heal it until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and illness of worm are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or inflammation, and the disease is ancient, you should make two cauterizations on the forearm; and another cautery between the breasts; and let it be the cautery called "clavile" in the form as was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you wish, perform cautery by pricking all over the cautery which is called "points" with the shape as described above in the ear disease; and make sure the points are up to 30 or less around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the limb as mentioned before, let the cauterization be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauterizations are lighter, because you make them in pairs (two).
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After being attentive to the patient on his back and on his side; after locating the cavity that is within the hole with your left hand's tip; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the cavity until it penetrates to the costal cartilage, and the figure of the cautery consists of four cauteries; and for this reason, caution is taken with the cautery that has two nerves, because the shapes of cauterization are these cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has two nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is dislocated on this, namely the nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After apply the cautery to crush with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated above (the joint), which happens rarely, then cauterize above the thick part of the cautery rod, or many cauterizations in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is reset, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When there are coldness and much moisture in the stomach according to his constitution, and there are many catarrhs associated with him, and the usual methods of treatment do not help, then the patient should lie down on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 Afterwards, do the third fire cauterization under the armpit with a thickness of one finger, on the entire cauterized area, and the second fire cauterization away from both sides until the figure of the cauterized area is at three angles, and there should be enough space between one and another so that they do not stick together when they swell; and the cauterized areas should be pointed enough to prick the two parts of the skin, and the figure of the cauterized areas should be according to this form without misalignment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and he who fears the cautery, cauterize by pointing and pressing on the stomach at the desired depth; then cauterize all over the area that is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the wound has taken place, let it remain healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver experiences pain from cold, moisture, and large wind due to its natural constitution being disturbed by excesses; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, it does not help him. The patient must be positioned on his backside; and three cauteries should be applied according to this shape and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondriac region where the ribs of the chest are located; and there should be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a thumb; and the cauteries should be long enough for the body, but do not press too hard on all the cauteries; and only the middle part should be burned, and the patient should be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, he should lie down and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the shape:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your wish is to cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, beware that you do not burn too deeply, for you would scorch the entire body; and not let it come too close to the boil, for the fire is very subtle in this place, and the wise can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When you have an abscess in the liver and you want to know if it is in the liver tissue or in the membrane: if it is in the tissue, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, the patient feels strange pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment is over for the sick person, it is necessary that the patient lies on his head; and then press down on the place where the abscess is, and then heat up the cautery which is like a pincers, of which form is as follows:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And burn the cautery until the flesh is burned through to the bone, and approach Syphax [a type of boil or ulcer] as far as it can be reached; afterwards cure according to the treatment for sores until it is healed; and this cautery should not be used by anyone who has not studied medicine for a long time, and many times these diseases have been made worse because of its use.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can boldly operate, but still I think it is better to leave him [the patient] alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that for pleurisy, one should apply fire cauteries made from roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as large and as long as your thumb; wet it in oil, heat it up, and then cauterize one cautery between the chest and neck, and two small cauteries a little downwards in the area below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind a little; one cautery on the side of the liver, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the liver away from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand tightly, but perform it as freely as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And an old man said that no one should use the cautery of fire resembling a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain subsides, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mice, that is, leprosy, as we have said in the treatments, and it does not improve, then present three ways of cautery, all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are several ways to perform the cautery, linking according to the length of the mouse (arrow), as described before for the liver cautery; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, let the patient lie on his back; another way of cauterizing is heating the cautery with two wires, as we showed in the shoulder dislocation; lift the skin where the mouse enters, or the boil comes towards the left side, and lift the incisions from the skin according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After placing the two inflamed nerves, heat them so that the holes are pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery; in this way there will be four holes, and if you see, cauterize at all three openings with the cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is worth doing what the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of the hydropieric disease
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cauterization does not work against dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and at the worst spot; and let the cauteries be close to the affected area.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery open to purge for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen is the clavicle as we have shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it is described above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical and full of watery citrine, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and dip your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go in too deep, as this would be too harsh on the watery citrine; and let the cautery be shaped like this:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing two cauteries in each leg with the point of the knife; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside the leg; leave the cauteries over it for a long time to heal, until the yellow matter disappears; after healing the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the emaciation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly solution comes from coldness and moisture, while the digestive and retentive virtues in the stomach and intestine are obstructed and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, do this: apply one large cautery on the stomach as described before (cautery of the stomach), around the navel circulate; and four subtle cauteries all around the abdomen, one subtle cautery clavicle, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the joints (of the limb) and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach under the large one, because the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When hemorrhoids are based or several, and they are old and made of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if you perform cauteries: III on the spine of the back, this which is completely turned over almecgate [a term for a point or mark] and back and forth in triangular fashion; and the cautery under the buttock II should be done; and if you think that the stomach is chilled and meat does not cook, and the face swells, then the face receives the large cautery on the stomach as described earlier, and the other on the liver, and the other on the spleen with the entire cautery nail; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the shoulder when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the hernia called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the cautery to althelul, heat up the cautery that seems like a razor, and then place it all over the althelul to be cauterized; leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, so as not to miss it. Do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, heal with ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	from an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear incision or opening, as we will explain in its place, this disease comes which cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If anyone has an abscess that is filled with pus and corruption, probe it entirely with a subtle instrument, and ensure you know the depth of the probe completely.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After cooling the cautery that appears to be a shaver, push it into the abscess according to the depth that the probe has entered, and repeat the cautery until the corrupted and rotten flesh is burned, once or twice, depending on the amount of pus needing to be drained; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the abscess goes to the body of the bladder or intestine, beware of these areas and do not perform this procedure outside charnut; consider that it is not certain; after healing the area when it is healthy, if the area is pierced and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is healed completely; but if the matter has not been removed, know that the area is injured, and corrupt the bone there.
de la maladie des reins	17. Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the loins and severe swelling comes from the kidneys, and it does not take on female characteristics, then you should perform cautery over the kidneys on both sides with the cautery as previously mentioned; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have 4 cauteries in a line, and it will provide more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder becomes weak and soft from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the area beyond the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, and both should be as long as one's thumb; and make one incision behind the back, or two if necessary; and make the cauteries sharp according to the shape previously described.
de la marris	of the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marriage is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to do four cauterizations around the womb, as we have said in the treatment of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make the cauteries sharp, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the haunch
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend into the joint of the haunch and cause it to become immobile, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joint's location can be observed by sight, if necessary you should cauterize the patient over the joint of the haunch with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the joint around the area, so that the area is within the circle; and the cauterization should be similar to that used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make four large olive-shaped cauterizations, and the cauterizations should be as deep as all the wounds; and heal it until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the haunch
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the loin of the haunch, and it is due to coldness and moisture; the patient is treated as we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 Afterward, perform cautery; and the method of cautery is according to two methods: namely, with burning substances and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 The method of fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is as follows: you should cauterize above the breastbone with three triangular cauteries in this manner, and make a good depth and width, leaving space between each cautery about the size of a thumb, and use olive-shaped cauteries; sometimes cauterization is performed on the middle of the chest over the nipple, for which there are four in this manner:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, perform the fire cautery on the circular cauterizer mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire thigh, and all the flesh around the wound is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method that one does in sciatica, when pain persists in the hip, and cannot reach the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it comes to the thigh and the leg, one should perform a fire cautery at the place where pain persists, and the fire cautery should be four fingers deep at the left side of the ankle; and the cautery may be sharp, and the fat should be burned off; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two feet or close to it, the cauterization should be performed there where they feel pain three inches or four around the cauterization called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery with a scalpel-type or circular cauterizer, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen more than once who performed cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and allowed it to heal so that the leg became completely swollen, and the toes also, and all the toes were pierced and ruined.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly solution (surgery) from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, perform a cautery on one and on the other part, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the cautery in the hernia, thus is the method, make the iron like a nail of the thumb or slightly less, and it should be interwoven or from one to another with a space the size of a nut of the fist; and let the interwoven parts be above two fingers, and let them be like nuts, and have the iron well made; this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heat it up until it is all red and boiling hot, and then place it on the sick person's shin, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one iron rod and leave for four days; then apply a plaster of butter, leaving the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says we should use little of this fire cautery due to fear of its gaze, and few use it; however, this is one of the good cauterizations that can endure it, where it scorches.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The medical burning cautery is that you make the instrument for interwoven parts to pierce the edge of the opening, and it should be made of iron or steel with a long handle, and at the top have two nuts, and between each one have the size of an egg; and they should be open on both sides and join together as shown in this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the hot iron of the branding rod on top of the patient lying on his right side, place your hand very near the branding rod; afterwards, pour water between the two circles of the hot iron which is heated in the fire pot, and leave it for an hour, allowing the patient to endure the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it causes biting like fire; and when the biting has passed, you lift your hand with the instrument and raise the brand slightly, leaving it for three days, applying butter until the blackness from the burn is removed; then leave it for three more days to let purulent matter drain out; and this would be the final aid after the cure of unguents until it heals.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, perform the instrument that binds as you did in the hinges tightly; it is the method of hot embrocation, and I have written or treated about it in the correction of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Mix equal parts of alkali and hot live coal, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 or have a small hole covered except the tip of a raisin can enter; and pour from one pot to another tightly sealed pot, then put on top of it alkali, hot coal, and soft embrocation, until there is enough powder on top that you can well grasp with your hand; and leave it in this way until it thickens into paste or the pot is filled, then take all the paste, and pour it onto hot coal and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then if it becomes very hot and is administered in various procedures of medicine and cauteries for other members, as it does the same work as fire, and if there are other medicines with which they cauterize the wound well such as tesisie, honey, anacardi, and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 Galen tells us of a cure in which a nobleman was cured from the pain of hemorrhoids and sciatica, and he praised it greatly, saying that there was no other cure, and that it became healed at once when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as indicated below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he said in this way that you take fresh and dry verditer powder and grind it very well with a little fat, and place it on the hemorrhoids and on the thigh and leg where the pain is, and hold it; and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make it enter into bath water until the body becomes slightly warmed, and make it lie down in bed, and the pain will disappear entirely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 Know that no one should use fire cautery with such medications unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 Diascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheep's fat, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and anoint it with old oil, and place it over the furrow that is between the toe of the foot and the one called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dry sheep's fat and heat it until it becomes charcoal, place it on the linen, let it remain for a while, repeat this procedure again, and continue doing so as long as you think that it will reach the heel and that the pain will cease; this method of cautery is called 'sheep's fat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from falling, or blows, or excessive bleeding, or similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth using cauterization except for the one that comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary afterwards that the patient is voided of foul pills or similar things, which are placed on the back where the pain is, three lines signed with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the potency and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do four cauteries or four according to the moderately sharp cautery in this manner:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine on the back and in its appearance which comes over other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of that kind in this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The cautery increases each part of the spine in size.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, cauterize around the spine using a cautery pointed 2 or 3 lines apart and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the joint when it is healed as we have said, be careful not to administer a cautery in a swelling that is in the nerve's spine.
de la dolor des jointes	For the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured with cauteries in this manner: make a large amount of cautionery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautionery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if necessary, prick on the face of the foot, and make a cautery all over with a sharp point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make a cautery on each knee 3 or 4 times over all parts, with an olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand too far away from the heated iron.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend down to the knees and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 If the pains are in the hands, make incisions around the wrist joints; and if no pain remains at the elbows, make incisions on each joint and along the wrist of the hand; and if the pains come down to the arms or shoulders, cauterize each part and administer good care to the patient and consider medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you provide good care and purge the phlegm, it will be healed with God's aid.
de la routure dou syfac	of the dislocation of the thigh
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When ruptures come in anger, and the intestines descend into the abdomen and it is newly formed, if you wish to cure it, it should not be touched that day; and it should be treated with things that relax the stomach, so that the intestines descend from the stomach. After doing this, make the patient sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm straight until the rupture is repaired, and bend them at your elbows, and press firmly on the site of the rupture above the wrist bone, and at a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery according to this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and yields pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then pull the bowels back to their place; and have the minister hold his hand so they do not return; work the thighs of the patient well, and put the cussin and serjant on the thighs, and another one on the affected area where he holds the hands; then place the cautery on the sign all over your hand, hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful that the bowel does not come out while you are performing the cautery; do not burn it; and beware that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 The cauterization of children should be subtle according to their size, and that of adults according to theirs; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; after that cure it with other remedies until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary that his urine be restrained for a long time, so that the scabs do not protrude when he gets up to go to the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a cloth should be provided for him and kept on for forty other days; let him rest well, so that he does not overwork or eat too much and drink too much and speak too loudly; and when he follows these instructions, he will be completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say afterwards the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the wound from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When roundworms come in other wombs and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, then make the cautery of the cautery according to its size, and let it be burned the third part of the belly; afterwards cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a four-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first sign the position of the wound and make a line above the roundworm, and another below, and take your hand at the entire four-angled cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or wounding, and that pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cures do not help, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If the first cautery heals, that is good; but if not, you should start another cautery on it, because this custom is that it should change in the member which is close to it, so you should perform cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The illnesses are sometimes alleviated by cautery with great help, and the same applies to those that come from the corruption of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see the patient being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, without sores or persistence, then you doubt that the corruption will affect the whole patient, then apply V cauteries on the head: First, turn the head towards you, and the other one towards the front to the end of the hairs; then on both temples, and behind the ears; and let your hand stay so that the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scorches come out as long as the vapors of large humors can escape; then cauterize the area where there is tumor according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is scattered everywhere, it manifests clearly that you must cauterize it with the cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttock and one other near it, and two on the hips; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the last ribs, lest you burn them; and sometimes do a cautery on the bone of the fist, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you perform cautery, the more help it provides, and it benefits them; and know that sick people feel no pain during cautery as healthy ones do, because their bodies are already all corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is drained.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When a swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then do cautery on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little deep into the flesh; then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes a cautery is performed on the hand, foot and back, at the opening of the nerve that renders the limb motionless, and thus if the skin is removed; but no one should interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the openings of moving nerves.
de albaras	From the sling (or bandage)
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness called "albaras" appears, and medical instruments are of no use, then cauterize it with a small hot iron, according to the thickness of the wound skin, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then treat it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, as well as the blood of a pig and the blood of an almond, each in turn; mix everything together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil begins to appear and you want to stop it, if you cauterize it with the cautery that seems circular all around the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And the wise say that a cautery should be applied in the middle of the boil; but this does not seem good to me, because I fear it will ulcerate and decay, and I have seen it happen once; and a more appropriate thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circular", as we said earlier concerning cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	the inflammation that cannot grow larger
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which is slow to heal or because of the superfluity it makes or due to the age of the patient when they are very old and have little blood, or because of the time; if you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it in this state.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 It will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through and through with the fire-cautery, then heat the fire-cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the core, and make sure the cauteries are such that the patient feels it outside in this way that the course of the pus is made easier.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure when he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another type of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but an erosion of a limb, because it consumes the limbs as fire dries out wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, small and large, according to where the disease is located; after cauterizing all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, everything corrupted should be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and put on the affected areas soothing balm made with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the ointment treatment for generating heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if you see after three days that healthy heat does not arise, it is good; and if it does not, then perform the fire cautery again on the corrupted lesion.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this remedy has sometimes been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for hot medicine in the section on disease: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The hairs which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often it happens that in the foot there arises a disease called "clog" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing filled with pus that inflames the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries for this disease are of two kinds.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Cautere of fire is when you heat the iron [or metal] like a feather on a hot coal, and it should be made of good iron to the size that can pierce through the nail from all sides, and have fine margins; then place everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it starts to melt; and leave it so for three days until it begins to emit pus; then make a plaster of bad herbs boiled with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nails will shrink and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the joint with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if it is turned outward by the body and often happens in hands and feet, you should bring hot cautery; and this is done in such a way: take a rod of iron or copper, or a plumbers' pipe, and place it on top and the coal, which means to burn warts; and place the rod so that it surrounds completely, then put a little hot coal there, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the margin of the rod comes to the root of the coal, and can find the hot coal channeled down to the root; and let the patient endure a little bit of the bite of the hot coal for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will uproot itself completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 As another follows, while you are heating all those who are within the body, then you care for the ointments that heal burns.
li cure dou trembler	The Cure for Trembling (literally: "the trembling care")
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	For some who tremble from coldness of the nerves or from quarter fever or any other illness, you should perform four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the navel, and one above the stomach with the olive cautery; this will stop the trembling, and the healthiness will hasten away from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Putrid boils (literally: "smelly pustules")
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes, through the body, baths appear or pusulous wounds come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 At first, when they appear, it is necessary to perform a cauterization on each chief of the pus: a fine cautery made from mirte stick, from which the tip should be impregnated with fire, or from the long root of aristologue, or to the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the excess from which they come is broken up, and they are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	At times, there are great discharges of blood from the cut artery that comes at an open wound or abscess incision, or to a cauterized limb, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to allow this to flow out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And furthermore, whenever this happens, hasten to place your finger on the vein wound, and hold it very tightly until the blood is stopped from flowing; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red; then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located; and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If the vein jumps when you hold your finger on it and the cautery stops, take hastily another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after another until the blood is stopped flowing; and beware not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery does not stop bleeding, it cannot be well stopped when the artery is large, unless this is done by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be tied and held in place accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies tight bandages or places hot things on it, or similar things, will not benefit from it unless otherwise.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens and there is no medicine or remedy present, then put your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly over the wound and the vein; do not move it but wet it with cold water often until the wound is very cold, frozen, swollen, and held in place; and follow the instructions for cauteries and medicines that are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgery
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which fire cautery or a burning medicine is required, and about their kinds, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter up to the feet, and I will go into this chapter through the same way because it will be easier for you to find those things that you are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you not to attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If people come who are healing themselves with their disease such that they die easily because of the insanity that arises from their illness and the greatness of its wickedness, then one must be afraid of them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these there are those who give you their sense and say "wait, I am cured"; but the disease is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 You should not easily consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place more importance on your honor than on your desire, and do not give way thoughtlessly but wisely from those about whom you are certain, and from which you can take lessons; and use prediction and indication in the treatments of your patients so that health may be achieved; and this will help you acquire good renown, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son, Our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness, and if you desire to inspire by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have organized this chapter in sections, as it is set out according to the chapter of cauteries, which I have previously explained from head to foot because you will find it easier to understand what is necessary.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full head swollen with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all that I have seen hasten to death; therefore it seems to me worthwhile to abandon the work in some treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose neck was filled with water and his head swelled every day until he could no longer bear it; the moisture gathered under the skull bone between the skull and the bone; and since the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision large in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can pass; and here is the form of a lancet:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone and you see the joints at the head of each part opening wide when pressed with your hand from within, and it does not respond to you: you must make three incisions in the head of the joint like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after incising, remove all moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After making the incision, remove linens and powders, then apply wine and oil, let it be so until the fifth day; then unbind it, cure the wound with bandages and ointments, allow the head to swell, and give the patient dried meat of a moist animal until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe the size of the abscess and its source, for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, open where the abscess is located and drain the pus, and do as you are able; and be careful not to cover the artery; and let some blood flow, so that the patient may die a natural death due to bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Then take remedies made from rue herb.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When any disease called "catarrh" occurs among the eyes or in a worse condition and the medicine does not help at all, then the last remedy is the cautery with which two arteries will be covered.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you wish to cover it, the patient should lie with his head backwards; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then grasp the patient's neck with a cloth; then look where the veins are, and the ears are on either side, and the temples are behind; then mark the veins with ink; then strike one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the cutting reaches the bone, but only along the width of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you wish, push the spatula under the artery and strike it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers through it.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is pricked, it should jump up without stopping repeatedly moving upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery does not open up on its own, you must measure the space of three feet, then make an incision to the bone; and that which needs blood to be removed is 6 cubic inches, and about a spoonful more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without swelling, if the pus that comes from an abscess does not come out, then hold and bind the wound and treat it with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	from emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old emigration and acute catarrh come, due to moisture in the tears and heat in the temples and ancient dementia and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medicine but none of it helps; if we open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extraction [of what is stuck] is that the patient tilts his head back towards the hairs on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and can be easily located except in some very cold people; and if it has been located, the patient tightens his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with a rough fabric, and scratches the area with warm water until the artery becomes manifestly apparent; then take the spatula as shown here:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then, gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs (clamps), and carefully remove the bands from both sides; if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the scissors, then squeeze that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut (or opened), it cannot move at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood from the 5 cm to the 4th one; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with a thick silk thread, which prevents pus from coming before the wound of the incision, and allows the flow of blood; then cut off the excess between the two threads in that hour itself, and if you see, cauterize it with the cautery knife up to the bone until the shoulders are severed; and this is the mutilating work, if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauteries are aid for curing the moisture; because it is of greater help to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tourniquets on it; and when they are loosened, if it is cured with dry medicines that make pus, and with tourniquets, until it heals; and if without a cut of the artery as you work, hurry to cover it with cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze it with your hand so that the blood does not flow out; and if you do not have this, place your finger on the area until it becomes frozen, and moisten the area with cold water and squeeze it as needed; and those that are swollen and heavier in the extraction of the artery should be cauterized with this sharp cautery cutting .5 inches deep, but they should be thick for a longer time to preserve their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the strumens are too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two cuts, one being large in space; and when you have marked the two places, and you put hot iron on them until it reaches the bone, and pierce the vein in two places; and they should be separated by the two heads because it is not bonded with this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	And the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing into the veins that are on top of the head of the fire, and it does not help with any medicine that is applied there, and you see the patient writhing in pain, and feel the forehead trembling like a fever; and if they are weak and moist so that the hair of the scalp falls out, and the scalp becomes scorched from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And they will call it the ancient "contused cure", and you should do this to the patient who has this illness on his forehead. Then you make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead; one of the cuts is as deep as needed, advancing all the way from the brow to the root of the nose, and the other two are along each eyebrow above the eyelids, taking care not to cut the arteries that are at the top of the eyebrows. Also, keep your hand away from the continuation of the jaws, and let each wound be the size of three fingers joined together; and have a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth ready to clean and drain the blood, then insert the sharp spatula twice the width of what is shown here in its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is through the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the skull that is between the two cuts down to the scalp, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this pointed instrument.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Push the instrument called "culter-like" into the first incision. It is very sharp from one side, but soft and not sharp from the other, and it has the shape of a:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And press the cutting edge towards the raw flesh and the ribcage until it reaches the middle cleft, and push so that it comes to the midriff bone.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And cut all the veins that descend from the head of the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens the midriff, and then continue in the middle cleft on the other side; and then drain the blood evenly, and press the leek for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each cleft, and put on moistened linen cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and rosewater, and make sure that no pus comes into it; and on the third day, undo the sutures, and apply a large plaster of strong mustard, then treat with ointment of basilicon with oil of roses, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyelids
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes with an acute catarrh usually, and you see the eyes becoming swollen and small, and the vision blurred, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and a headache occurs at pain ague, and the patient coughs; then recognize these symptoms that those matters and such catarrh do not come from any other place than many veins, and the medicine to cure it is that.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is that you instruct the patient to bend their head back, then make a large cut across the forehead and another deep one below the ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 Start from the left temple to the right temple and let the incision reach the bone; move your hand away from the nerves that move when eating; once the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, then separate the two lips of the cut and put old cotton in between, and tie it with linen; then cover it with damp cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and be careful not to get an abscess hot; once it is removed, you should rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat with things that are drying, which cause char to grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; administer it to these wounds to promote the growth of char everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar items like iron; seeds, beans, peas; or flowing matter such as water and sand and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear stone or any other thing that does not align with the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see a stone, apply some drops of purple oil or camphor oil, then perform extraction; and make it vomit with mustard, and stop up the nostrils when the vomiting comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the head elevated.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often farting occurs through this treatment; and if it does not fart, extraction is performed with fine tweezers, of which the following is the procedure:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out at the hinges, that's good; if not, introduce extraction with a thin hook of double curvature; and if it doesn't jump out by that means, make a wooden pin and push its head into the hole of the ear strongly, stop up that which is around the pin with soft wax so that the air cannot enter with the pin; then pull it out forcefully, for often it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take some glue from it and take the birds, and put any tool sharp for that purpose, and put a piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or something else, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it doesn't jump out due to all the things that we have mentioned, hasten to make an incision in the ear so that pus and spasm come out; and the manner of the incision is such that you first lance the patient's head, drain the blood according to the measure of its power, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or tissue dependent on it; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, until you reach the bone, then pull it out as much as possible, and suck the pus quickly to your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a thin, slender spatula in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist from ear moisture, until you have made many slices; then extract it with subtle tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Therefore, in water that falls into the ear, the patient should first use warm water and cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And lie down with the same ear on that side where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it doesn't jump out, take many pebbles according to the width of your finger and lightweight, heat them slightly in the fire; then make the patient put a cord or stick in his ear, and hold one stone with the other hand from the other side, and press another stone against the stone that is in the ear; and keep pressing the stones together until the water comes out entirely, and then it will jump out completely; and if you see, take the cord, and push one of the stones further into the ear, and let the other end grab fire until the closest part is burnt; then remove all the stones as described in the pebble.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of an animal, if it is small like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, perform extraction with tweezers. This is the easier thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and the treatment of distillations, and if the cure does not benefit, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the string of which this form is given.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it shall be narrow beneath and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And the finest head should be inserted into the ear according to the amount of pain of the patient, then suck it completely at once; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out, stop up the canal with cotton as I have said in the other chapter; and if they still do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations which the ancients have proven effective for worms, and you will find them or how to prepare distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, thus is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it narrow within and wide above with a silver or iron frame having one small hole, and over it a cover for the distillation; and to press inside the distillation, use one apparatus of iron well made for this purpose; and if you see that you need a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip, then put your oil or juice and any medicines in the string, which should be in the ear; then insert the scraper with all the cotton into the ear, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear becomes warm; let the patient smell it within, and make sure the distillation is heated to about the same temperature as when it is distilled in the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicines will not be effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some deafness in the ears; and this same thing happens to men through stoppage of wounds or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage sometimes comes completely into the ear if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a little hole showing the deafness, which can easily be seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if the stoppage comes completely into the ear and cannot be seen, it is difficult to cure in many cases. In such case, you must put the sick person's ear in the sun and look inside. If you see a visible obstruction, you should open it with the spatula as shown here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and piercing in front and behind entirely, so that it does not prick the ear; if the inflammation is of flesh or bone of the ear, then hold it with subtle tweezers and strike gently until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the swelling has filled the ear entirely, take a subtle razor lightly and heat it slightly over fire, then place it in the ear of the swelling.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the swelling that causes discomfort in the ear of the patient, make a small incision carefully and ensure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a tube according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a lining and moisten it in rosewater and powdered vitriol; if you see the ear swollen, then you must pull out the lining and insert another moistened linen made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling is removed; then heal it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And when bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and linen in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either distilling methods.
de la char des papieres	of the charcoal from paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method by which hairs that are damp and dry come from paper. It is necessary to stretch them with pliers and tweezers, and then rub their roots with a copper spatula. Then place it on broken glass.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if the hair cannot be removed by pulling, cauterize it with subtle lenticular cautery, and after incision is useful. Many times they repair, but nothing remains of their roots; and when the hairs are cauterized by fire, the roots burn and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the shingles
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times bring forth from the earwax something that appears hard and solid in shape, and for this reason is this disease called "granule", and it is a mass of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the work involves taking precautions so that the granule remains motionless from one side and the other, and it is easy to know if it does not move; therefore, make an incision along its length, then peel off each part gently, and take it with the tweezers and crush it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it with a patch without piercing slightly the paper, it causes nothing to the patient; and if the wound is large, gather it together in a suture, and care for it until it heals; and if it is small, do not apply force, as the ointments will restore it soon.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, take tweezers and remove it, pressing from both sides; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, do not worry about it; and when the hail is removed, apply salty oil to the affected area and treat the wound with ointment until the patient recovers.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 It is a grease that is ointmented on paper towels above, and this often happens to children rather than adults, and it causes much pain to them, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and for that reason, they lie down immediately, sleep on top, and have the paper towels damp under their eyelids, which spreads the grease and covers the appearance with oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the dislocation inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of this procedure is that the patient places his head on your healthy one; then take one linen cloth and arrange a tent-like circle according to the quantity of grease from each part, then place it thereon; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the grease is gathered in the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp spatula making an incision no larger than the wound one makes in the vein opening; and cut through the skin until you see the grease; and in many cases, the grease comes out from the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Place a piece of thin, woven cloth between your fingers and turn your hand back and forth until it is spread out; make sure you do not stray in the incision, only to reach up to the marrow, and do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, slightly open it to make it appear; then spread it as we have said, soak cloths in water and oil, place them on the area, and hold bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such men who break the skin and set it up to corrupt that moisture which is retained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it until it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess comes to the joint that burns hot, then heal it with plasters cooling until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs of the paper [or possibly: the hair on the paper]
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the hairs grow on paper contrary to nature, and are nurtured, they cause harm to the eyes, and bring about types of diseases such as tears commonly associated with paper, softening of the paper and albugine, to the point of causing damage to the eyes; and there are four methods of treatment: either by cauterization using fire, or through medication ague according to what is described in the previous chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by canes, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper with oil on your left hand; if it is converted (meaning if it curls around the oil), that is good; if not, you should poke an awl at each end of the paper where the hairs are growing out of the hairs; and remove one filament above the entire length of the paper, then shave the area beneath the paper where the hairs grow, entirely through the spatumile (possibly a kind of blunt knife or scalpel), from the large tear down to the small one; then pull out one filament, and place a small tent made of cotton and wool under the paper, then sew a figure of an incense thong (or possibly myrtle) on top of the paper, ensuring that the figure is proportionate to the amount of paper you wish to raise.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is a need to use a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make the entire ointment layer on top of the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger blister until the smaller one; and make one of the incisions near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then insert the onion in one of the two angles of the wound, then peel off all the skin; then gather the edges together with a thread of a fine needle and squeeze out the blood, and make the excess threads adhere to the scissors with anything sticky, if you wish to do so; and if not, leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then heal the wound without stitching using dry and binding substances, because the paper softens at the edge of the wound and gathers it together, but the stitching is rotten (as the ancients say), and this is laborious work without fear; and in another way: it is that you should boil the paper into a form similar to the leaves of myrtle, as we have described earlier, using three onions per leaf according to the shape shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this equally over the small wounds according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the tongs and the object is not even, take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure; insert the other end of the thread through the large incision, and the second end through the small one, and arrange the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin as you have said, then suture the two edges of the wound with stitching, and let it heal until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments; and sometimes the hair of the paper is turned: in such a case you must use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in one place and another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and fold it according to what I said, and then make two cords by hand, and two thin threads equally long as the paper and the thickness of the spatula; take the two corners of the four pieces where the threads are; then assemble the one and the other subtly above the paper with oil, and bind the two cords from the four parts; leave it in this manner for several days, and the skin that is bound will die, rot and peel off, until it falls away.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it takes a long time [for the wound to heal], if [the patient] beats it with force, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound has been sutured, and the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will not grow anymore; this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work (task) is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of silk and fine; then assemble the dogs' heads closely and skillfully, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange another thin thread of silk briefly, and join the heads of the threads; then place the patient's head in your healthy state; expose it to the sun so that the work is visible, because this is a subtle and small work, then pierce the needle through the entire chase (hair) at the root of the hair adjacent, and let it penetrate quickly through the paper over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and place the hair in the chase, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out from all the chase together with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the chase down to the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes out of the skin and can be seen by the oil's vision; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and let the oil and the patient rest for two or three days, until the hair roots and new flesh grows; and if the hairs are small, you should accompany one long natural hair with it, and let it grow along with that, until it is extended and then shave it.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the corruption of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease which is called "alecrate" or the purulence comes in the eye, there are two ways it can occur: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it occurs through sudden wounding, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 The manner of work in it is that you cut the suture, separate the lips of it, and put inside linen tents and bind it until it heals; and you should not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but by doing things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and the juice of watercress or lettuce, or flaxseed cooked, and quickly cooled in any oil, and wrapped in a cloth, and treat it with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you must take care so that it does not heal closed again in its former shape; and this work that we have said is only remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	the pus that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things; and the work in it is that you take a needle with double thread, and pierce it through the flesh, starting from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out of both cheeks of the flesh; then lift the flesh above the whole needle, and apply the spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the opening, turn the paper, and make two openings where the bone protrudes inside the paper; and let the heads of the bones be from the two openings at the two angles of the incision you made, and let a shape be formed such that when they are assembled, the figure is like the shape of a letter "I greek"; then remove that flesh according to the thickness where the bone protrudes, then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen; then treat it as we have said of medicines softening and healing, and of binding, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a slit or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a deep incision under the hairs of the paper, as previously mentioned; then separate between the two leaves of a linen cloth, as I said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare tools with all possible skill to bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the work and the use of various instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	quickly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is glued with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it up; hold it with pincers until you remove the substance that adheres to the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too rough, so as not to cause pain to the patient due to a too sharp spatula injuring the oil; make your incision, from which you will scrape the assembled matter, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal the entire assembled matter, and sometimes in the sharp oil it becomes infected, and you lift up the sharp soft liquid and collyrium; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put over the oil dampened wool in abundance from an egg; and after the third day use collyrium and other healing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	the tip of the spatula
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Note that the nail has two forms: it is nerve-like and resembles a hard spike, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white solidified moisture when touched with iron and cooked in pincers, and neither begin near the great eyelid, but gradually grow to cover the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places their head in your hand, then you pull out the hairs; next take paper with your hand, then bend the nail into tweezers of small double curvature and hold it above; then take a needle, put a horse hair or cow or ox hair and a strong thread on it, bend the tip of the needle slightly and pierce the nail, and pass the needle through completely, tie the nail with the thread and hold it above, remove all the hair from the side of the nail where there is skin and silk at the root to the head, then crush the remaining part in the root of the armpit with all subtle spatumile and small forces, leaving the natural flesh or armpit so that blood does not come out of the armpit as usual; and sometimes the nail is only placed on the incision and at the thread, as we have said; then remove all the spatumile from the place as described here:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatumile does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the vein is not pierced; then after the incision pour oil a little bit of broken fat and make a poultice from litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous and you cannot push the needle through it, and the uncines cannot enter it, this condition of the nail is often treated with medicine; and as I have mentioned in the division, when you see it covered, then open the oil of the patient and take a little sharp spatumile according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently scrape the nail above, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the reason persists, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litharge and red collyrium powder, and instill the oil until the next day; then perform the same work again according to this same procedure, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with an abscess, then let it lactate, and first treat the abscess hot until it is healed, then perform the same work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the wound harms the oil greatly, suspend it in onion juice and cut a small portion of it, so that tears do not come out; then distill red collyrium oil made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh which grows upon the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 The first hairs of some men sometimes grow red and cover the eyelid, sticking to the paper and turning towards the outside, resembling a rosebud; and the operation is such that the patient places their head on a cushion, then you open the eyes, and it is necessary to remove all that redness with incisions suitable for this purpose, and hold it in place with force; then strike the first redness, and continue scraping until the end, taking care not to nick the oil at the operation site; and the incision should be made with a spatula, as mentioned in the incision of the nail and small tools used to remove the core, as this form following the chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all the redness is removed, apply oil of holy ointment, or distilled red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton with egg white on top, so that it is sure to heal without infection; and if anything remains, or the wound becomes inflamed, and you doubt it has become infected, leave the oil and treat the infection with calming agents for infected wounds; then return to your operation when it is healed, and do the same for all hairs that have grown red in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in every case it is necessary that you ease the treatment of each weak part along the natural way; and regarding the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not strike your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can endure that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Should be red veins that are covered over the oil, and they obscure their work and weaken the oil every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 First, it is necessary to examine the oil where the red veins are, and there is no other disease but the sebel; therefore, tell the patient to lean his head in your hand, then suspend those veins for a certain time according to your wisdom, and let the fingers be subtle, double, as follows:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And the organs should be two times in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then these veins should be gently squeezed subtly, and the blood sucked out hour by hour until you see the veins swell outside of the oil; and ensure that you do not prick the oil with the points of the spathulas, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very warm during your work so as not to overheat the veins; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red oil colicers to correct those that remain clogged.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect everything in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and the abscess is sure to heal, then continue as before in this manner until it is healthy; and this is the form of treatment:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirroring fistula is called "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is a trick in it that you open above the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, you should cover it with all the instruments mentioned here; it is called "rough head," and should be made of iron as shown in the following figure:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the bone that is corrupt, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is restored; do this once, then restore the bone with medicinal force.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the joint is fused and char is produced, and the body of the bone is fused and remains so for 40 days without healing or abscessing, and no bad accident occurs, it is known to be healed; if not, there is no other remedy than returning the fistula to its original position according to this form: you are to expose the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines that are hot, and when it is exposed, take the iron as shown here: the head of the iron should be at three angles, and the shaft should be thinned down to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Place the iron on the bone exposed at the lamella and move your hand away from the oil pit, then turn the iron completely so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels it when the veins enter if you hold your hand on his neck; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the char forms and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the neck; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are wide open throughout the entire body and there is no disturbance in the ship, nor any diminishment, you must restrain the patient; then clean it, apply poultices or hot irons to help heal, then put oil on .i. link made of cedarwood and aloe and incense and saffron, and then hold the oil tight, and bandage it with cloths and linen; and the manner of the linens is that you take soft linens, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes require; then hold them together with a strong bandage, and renew the poultices to help heal without cutting; then remove the poultices and leave the oil tight for day and night, and if the link dissolves, you must tighten it strongly; then remove the link after the day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good; if not, repeat the bandage, the linens, the link and the poultices until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From the rupture of a rotten cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the watery eye and open, and they bring forth paper-like matter, as small as a grain of resin, and it is frightening to see; then, if you cover it, the remedy is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part underneath until the one above, then insert another awl with double thread from the corner of the wound; and make it perforate, leave the first awl according to its position; then hold the eye of the double-threaded filament and wrap a part of the eye around it, and tighten it well, then remove the awl and put soft wool soaked in oil on top of it; and leave it until the filaments grow with the eye, then cure the oil with comforting substances until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the eye on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes become large in appearance, pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from oil, and correct the moisture albujine, and then remove it; then leave it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not fierce except boils that are assembled in oil, resembling an abscess but it is not an abscess; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the boil rise to your eyes; then it should be lanced, and the abscess should not burst and the light should be revealed, and let the patient see things as he is used to; and if it does not burst underneath, know that it is an abscess, and if the lancing of the boil is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatula and press it onto the corneal membrane (the conjunctiva with the cornea) at the location of the problem; keep pressing until the bubo issue is expelled. When it has been expelled, distill on it hot sharp oil mixed with honey or boil down a mixture of sharp oil, water and fenugreek, then apply another cure to it until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	the acute oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have similarities with the eyes in their division, and what is needed to be pierced; work accordingly according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit with his head crossed between your hands, away from sunlight, and hold the oil tightly; then put the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eye is left-handed, or on your right hand if the eye is right-handed; then take in your right hand (if the eye is left-handed) the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand (if the eye is right-handed); then place the tip of the instrument next to the cornea at a distance of about a thumb's width from the lesser eyelid, and push the almagda instrument firmly, keeping your hand straight until it penetrates through the cornea; feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and the measurement of the almagda's path should be to the full length of the distance between the pupil to the end of the black part; this is the cornea of the oil; you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then push the instrument up to the place where the pus is, and press gently to extract it through another way.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If it is sharp, then let him (the patient) see it (the instrument) before him and apply it to his oil (wound).
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After a little rest and if the sharp point returns to the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not advance any further, you should gently rotate your hand here and there; then replace the sharp point slightly with gem-oil (molybdenum disulfide) and withdraw the oil from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then place the oil-soaked cloth or wool in rose oil and egg yolk, and bind it with oil of unguent.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those who are from our time, place on top a mixture crushed with egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, as there are some people who have excessively hard hairs; in such cases, you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And therefore pierce the joint only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare the patient for sleep, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be attentive to all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his position until the third day; then untie him in the same dark place, test his vision, and let him see some things, and then re-tie him for seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this during the cure or after the incision, but it is necessary that you release it, because the pain increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess has come to a head, let it be lanced before the seventh day, and direct this to those who soothe abscesses; and when it is soothed, lance the eye (incision) and put on gold orlinet to cover for any day, and remain in that dark house always.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 Then leave the house slowly and return to your cases; and know that no disciple should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country everyone was subjected to almagda piercing, so that the water comes out, but I never saw anyone in our land, nor did I read it in any ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And here are the resemblances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are from arain properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of oxen of this same subtlety, and the rear end in four corners should be sharp.
de la char sor le neis	About the skin over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes various charms are born joined together, of which there are some that seem like scorpions with multiple heads; and if there are any such where the charm is incarcerated by fire color, or if the charm is swollen with bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case, for the soft and not hard char, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice into those chars, and draw it out; then press what you can support with the subtle pointed spatumile on one side, until you know that that char is completely stopped.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing uncovered that cannot be covered, open it all with sharp and thin instruments, so nothing remains; and if the abscess is not closed, apply the remedy as necessary; and if the abscesses are malignant, hasten and cauterize until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then cover or dress it with oil or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it does not swell and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; if moisture does not pierce as necessary, know that there is char born in the bone above, to which the instrument will not come to cut: then you should put a piece of linen thread slightly thicker than a catgut, white and with space between each knot about a finger's width or less; and insert the patient's head into the thread as deeply as possible, and pull while smelling it until it comes from the nose towards the mouth; and many times do so in children at school, and it is easy for whoever wishes to perform it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know each other while we who are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do what you know that they have corrupted the flesh, then draw out the filth, squeeze the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back again to the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh; and then put a plank bandage on the nose for several days until it heals, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines through the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or brass, resembling a covered lamp, as a pipe, and lead it thus; and if you see, make a closed pipe, and the instruments full for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	About the skin over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the forehead of the nose and grows larger and larger until it is visible to see; therefore, you must cut it at the beginning and completely excise it, then put the cautery or burning medicine over it; and if you delay covering it until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, dark in color, with poor sensitivity: do not touch it with iron because it is an enlarged abscess, for when it is touched even once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is soft touching, not hard in color, and you can cover it completely, have the patient empty their bowels and cautiously cut it, then cure the area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 When solution of joints comes in one of these working cartilages, it does not benefit much, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, when this happens to anyone, examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then align the two lips (edges of the wound) together, heal it until it heals completely; and if the edges are separated from one side and the other, you must cauterize all parts of them that bleed, then align the two lips together, tighten, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and place a piece of strong or another plaster on top of the powders and leave it until it dries up, then heal with ointment until it heals completely.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is that you assemble the dislocation: either by needles, as we have said in the abdomen stitching; or by thread, as I told you earlier.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips (of a wound)
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the hands of men, an abscess hard within the lips occurs, resembling grains of various sizes; then you must turn the lips and make a cut above each one, take it with the forceps and crush it in every part; afterwards use vitriol powder on the wound until the pus is drained; and then apply alum to heal the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	from the jawbone
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often a swelling arises on the jawbone, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold it with the forceps and crush its root, allowing the blood to flow out; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders to the wound; if the swelling returns after the incision and this happens repeatedly, you must crush it again and cauterize it; but it does not return after cauterization. These are the shapes of instruments for covering.
des sordens	Of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are sores gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs that are ugly; and sometimes the teeth turn black and greenish, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; it is necessary that you make the patient sit with your hands, and his head in your lap, and clean the teeth or scabs exposed, until nothing remains; and do this for blackness and greenness, and for yellowish and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is there at the first instance, that is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, as long as you have everything cleaned; and know that the teeth need different types of instruments to clean them, according to what the work shows, because the one who cleans the teeth has different shapes than the one who cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary that you draw slowly as much as possible, for this must not be done quickly; because it is a very high substance up to where there is no excuse to shave.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is compelled to draw, you must be sure of the tooth drawing.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the pain deceives the patient, and thinks it is a tooth abscess, and draws out the healthy tooth; but the pain does not go away even then, as long as the evil persists, for we have seen this in many noblemen; and when you are certain of the diseased tooth, you must gouge around the tooth completely. Use a strong forceps to hold the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or delicate pliers at the root tip, little by little, until it is well loosened, then tighten the pliers; and keep the patient's head between your knees, and hold him firmly so he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After removing the tooth straightway to break it, and if it does not burst out, take one of these tools and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 If the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages at the place where it has been perforated; and if you grasp it subtly with pliers so as not to break it when pulling; and it is very important to work carefully around the gum line to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, because the patient will suffer more pain from the root due to the malice of the fracture.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And be careful not to act as the ignorant do who, out of haste and rashness, sometimes break a cart and fail to bring the aforementioned remedies; but bring about some time by the contagion of this great illness due to the roots that remain or because they break the cart as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or vinegar and oil; and if bleeding continues, which often happens, fill the area with pulverized vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which mute the teeth first, should be long pointed and have thick handles, not bending when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And have large handles so they do not bend when pulling, made of good iron, and toothed for holding on.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains exposed, you must cover it with soft cotton moistened in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 while the joints are still tender, put in the pliers called "algefri," which resemble tweezers, to align the shoulder as if it were a bird's beak; and inside make them as sharp as a file and shape them this way:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not come out with all these forceps, you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", namely tweezers, of which this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be large and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, that's good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps himself with this instrument which has two prongs, this is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other iron instruments that are in front for the reasons of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, here is its shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and similarly, other instruments, which are not counted here; and the wise masters discover their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the disease indicate, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument due to diversity among them, and if it breaks the cart or any other bone, or it could be used, then search for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and help with movements, here is its shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and strong to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can be held and removed; then restore the joint with medicines suitable for this, and if there is purulence in the bone, and it is small, use this instrument entirely:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, if you know that the teeth are not aligned after the tooth, and it is not in the correct position, and cannot be straightened or filed: then use a rasp; and if there is an abscess with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and sharp at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is similarly like the file from which one makes the needles; and in the file, the tooth little by little gnaws at hand for many light hours, so that it does not move until it chisels through; then the flat part at the end must be smoothed with any sharpener, and if the tip is too sharp and it bites the tongue, it is necessary to file down the sharpness so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are separated, whether by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press down on it to eat without crying, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but that doesn't work; then they must be held together with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never does; and the thread should be of medium size neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth align, take the thread and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the shoulder between the aligned teeth if there is one or more, as long as you see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering again until the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move; and bind the end of the thread to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then sew the shoulder heads with a wire using pliers, and assemble them, and put it back between the healthy teeth so that it does not touch the tongue; then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the wires break, hold another wire to keep it in place; let it remain like this for as long as it can endure, and if it works like this throughout its duration, it is the shape of the teeth and the position of the two healthy teeth and the two jaws, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, if you replace it in its place, freshly, as we have said; and do not interfere unless the person is wise and patient. Sometimes one makes the shape of an ox's tooth, and replaces it where it lacks, and holds it in place as we have said, and let it stay for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue by nature or by accident of a healed wound; and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth, hold their head steady, and lift the tongue; then sew the nervous ligament with a large stitch while the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, it is from a healed wound, in which case you bring an onyx (or a sharp tool) and sew the ligament with a large stitch; and make sure the cut is not too deep, because the artery is beneath it; and when done, lift the shoulder of warm water or warm oil, then put a flax tent under the tongue; and tie the patient's head each night so the shoulder cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if bleeding occurs, put vitriol powder on it; and if the wound bleeds again, cauterize it with slow fire cautery (or cauterize it with lentiginout, which is good); afterwards, treat it with other medicine until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a swelling of various colors, whether black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a boil; and if it is descending towards whiteness and there is moisture, throw the onion on it, and let a thin spatula be placed beneath it and release it from both sides; and if it resists your work, put vitriol powder on it until it is burned, then return to your work as long as you draw out all the pus; then remove the pus and serum, and cure it with other cures until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	swellings of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes boils called "godath" come inside the throat, which are properly called the II amandres (or almonds). And when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is hard abscess with small sensation and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also for the evacuation of blood; but let it stay until it turns black, and then you will cut it open or it would burst by itself; and if it is of white color again, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess has cooled down and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders should be healthy, and he opens his mouth and the sergeant takes hold between his hands, and presses the tongue under all the instrument, as follows; and it should be of silver or subtle iron like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the onion and thrust it into the abscess, and pull it upwards as far as you can; and pull out any foreign matter from there, afterwards strike with the instrument, in which form it appears similar to a hammer; and yet the head is bent, and one part is against another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or bronze:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument, strike it with the pliers, in which form it appears similar to:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have the instrument, strike one of the abscesses, and then strike the other in the same manner; after making an incision, gargarize the patient with hot, sharp, and mild water, and when bleeding occurs, gargarize the patient with hot, or scorched pomegranate seeds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then let it heal until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses than the two appear in the throat, if they do, strike them accordingly as the two equal.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside the throat, to be specific, an abscess of small size; and I had carefully closed all her throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the blocked passageway, nor could she eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had to be drained twice through the two openings of the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 Therefore, I immediately thrust it into one of the openings, then pulled it forcefully and took out a large piece of bone; then I reset another opening in the other shoulder, and opened its mouth and pressed its tongue; afterwards, I thrust the bone again into these abscesses, and took a part of it out, and no more blood came out; and thus I led the woman to have water and then wine, and she continued to drink from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled the cavity which I had emptied, so much that it became very large; then I trapped it and burned it inside the neck: thus it did not grow any more; and I left those parts alone, and may God do with them as He wishes after me.
de l’uve	I will treat a woman with an eye problem that was inside her eyeball, in other words, an inflammation of the eyelid; and it had grown very close all over the eyelid, so the woman could not open her eyes due to the swelling, and she could neither see nor blink, and would have gone blind if it lasted for a day or two. The inflammation had swollen so much that it had filled about two pouches inside the eyeball. Then I immediately lanced it once, then pulled out a large piece of pus; afterwards I opened another hole in the other side of the eyelid, and I held her eyelids open and pressed them against each other; after that, I lanced the inflammation again, took a part of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the growth of the inflammation was stopped for the woman, and she began to see again. The inflammation grew again and filled the space I had created, until it became very large; then I trapped it and cauterized it inside her eyeball: thus the growth of the inflammation was stopped; and I left those parts, and nothing more happened to them except that God did something with them afterwards.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When the rectum protrudes towards the anus and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is swollen and round, it is called "anus".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscesses are eased and it is subtle, you must cut it; and if it is rounded and not long, and it is either red or dark colored, you must avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger over the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it, in the manner that I have said, of its bladder and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then insert the finger into the anus, pull it out, and cut it at the places where I have said to make the incision in the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you not cover more than the natural limit of excess; for if you do so, it causes harm to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the second anus, and heal it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 If the patient is afraid to be covered, then it is necessary that you use an instrument for the cauterization of the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of the cautery is sharp heat.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient places their head in your lap, and then presses their tongue against the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and hold it with hot live coal, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the tip of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the head of a hair or medication is put on a head, as the comb of a spoon, and the instrument is placed entirely over the medicine above the eye; and the patient lies on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, but not down the throat, and the blood; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it swell and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument all over the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and lie for four or five days. And if you have to start the cautery again with the medicine, renew it, and after the cautery, wash around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, clean what is around the medicine; and irrigate with cold water, and heal with gargarisms until it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective than incision, not only cautery; if it is healed by fumigation according to this method, take camomile, yarrow, rue, and wormwood, and assemble them all or some of these in one pot, and put them inside, and boil it; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have one comb-like instrument as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And let it be silver or tin, and let one of the heads be pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied; afterwards repeat often, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's appearance, for many things happen therein; and do not do anything else but at the decline of the abscess's heat.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 If this is not present (silver or tin), then take a canal and put an eggshell crack into the head of the patient so that his mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell crack does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and it is good treatment along with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often it happens that a bone or fish spine enters the throat, or something similar; in such cases, you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all instruments so that you can see it move; and if it does not open by itself and is swallowed back into the throat, make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will be expelled through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, a piece of cotton, a root of lettuce, or a small piece of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will stick, and then you pull it out; and if it does not come out as described above, take a plank-like instrument in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the top so that it can enter the throat more easily, and hold the head up high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or the patient will choke, do not push the bone deeper; it is better for the patient to push the instrument, because it can move or the object is expelled; if they push it downward, you pull it out equally with the instrument until it is expelled.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the saliva from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the absence of medicine is the cure, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the patient's throat in the sun, since you press his tongue with the instrument I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the pus, draw it out very slightly with a small knife or delicate tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if it does not work, take a heated iron and place it in the patient's throat, then apply or press down on the handle of the iron frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And make the patient drink water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in so that he drinks it, moving his throat with your hand frequently; and as soon as the pus feels the water, he should spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, you should suffumigate the patient with asafetida, in the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this repeatedly, for it will soon return.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of fumigation is to take a pot with charcoal, cover it with a cloth perforated in the middle, and place the head of the instrument within it; then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the head of the tube in his mouth, close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to his nose; and now it should start, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation repeatedly; let the patient endure thirst, eat salty and oily food, and drink no water; then it will be necessary for it to come out with this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the wound, appears, when it can be seen, resembles curved tweezers for entering into the throat; and it has the appearance of a syringe beak, and it should have roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many resemble abscesses, according to what follows in this book from one and another, and they are different in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that one is similar, and of those which retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is by the lews (lymph nodes) that are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses of the head are different from those of the base, and abscesses in the swollen lymph nodes are different from those that come at joints, and each should be judged separately in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced, as long as the head is matured according to its completion; and if there are those that need to be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their maturity, such as abscesses that come from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when abscesses come near to joints and are left until they ripen around them, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupt, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 For if the abscess is near the main member and you delay the perforation until it has ripened, it will harm the main member; or if it is near the base, pierce it as soon as it has become ripe, but do not pierce an abscess without complete digestion, except for one that is near the base which cannot be entered and is narrow inside, and a fistula forms, and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time for perforating the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the disappearance of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the swelling and subsiding of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the perforation sit lower than the abscess, and where it has started to open; and the perforation should be as long as the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal or without a covering.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those who are swollen, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in a firm state, it is better to let the opening remain until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 If you pierce it before this time, the body will be flooded with the pus from it, and it will be filled with much filth; and there is danger of hardening the lips and plunging deeper into it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that has been pierced according to the size of the body, as required by the member.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary that you make small abscesses, small punctures; and large abscesses, large punctures, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where you must cover the wound and close it, when it has become as shriveled as a cloth, and is dead, it is necessary to do as for babies: and if there are such as have been cut into three angles, and if there are those which are closed like the wings of myrtle, like abscesses in joints; and if there are those where you make a round incision, and other similar ones and closures.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 For a person without a head, being an abscess on the surface, it should be pierced completely; and when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out part of it; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing incorrectly; do this many times gradually, until the pus is completely drawn out; similarly, if the patient is weak, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old and debilitated people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The sphincter occasionally twitches with the discharge of pus, which may accidentally cause death to the patient, and you should not worry about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, proceed with great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, drain the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is large, bring linen or old cotton threads; and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, you must pack in each one a thread so that they meet one another; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, you must fill it with old cotton or linen wool without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then open it, and heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and apply it, wet the cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bleeding persists, administer medicine and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is wintertime, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, then you must place warm towels and cloths moistened with wine and oil over them; and if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you must place cloths moistened with cold water and oil, or cold water and cool oil for up to three days, as we have said; then drain the abscess and let it heal, as necessary, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how to proceed with the treatments of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	The sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses on the head, it is our custom that they are wrapped in bandages, just like the grape-picker's hand and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some large and similar ones where there is moisture, just like boils; and there are some hard and stony ones without any doubt that the arteries do not oppose.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of the neck is that you probe with all instruments called "entromissoire," so the form comes later, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, they make a long incision over it.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape clean without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, because it returns quickly if left; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise in vinegar and linen, and use the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed by night will heal.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then repeat the lint, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know that it does not heal over; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the abscess remains filled with pus, squeeze it according to this shape, longwise; and throw away your onions, and scrape off all the skin from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out the pus from where it is located; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat the abscess if it is pus-filled and cut and heal as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the incision on the abscess becomes softer, because it is full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And in some of these abscesses or head, there is no moisture, and among these was the abscess that I lanced or the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a thorny stone, rough and swollen, and could not break it; and if one had struck it with any tool, one would have made a wound just like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads coming from children's heads and the roots of ears, they should be opened for as long as necessary, depending on the situation, to let pus out; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times this abscess occurs at the neck, under the jaw, and in the armpits, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are large, and they are connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 Each scrofula is properly inside the ribs, like the neck and abscess of the head as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the one that you see in good condition and resembles the color of the body, silent from all sides and not connected to the neck or the artery or the duct, and not deep; it should be cut open from above, and the skin of each part should be peeled off, and place the two lips of the forceps on the edges, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and draw gently and slowly, and ensure that you do not cover a nerve or the vein, and it should not be sharp or cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and look carefully before covering what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you open the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to proceed, put vitriol powder into the wound or some powders that stop blood, hold the wound closed; leave it until the abscess subsides, let the wound become soft, and begin to discharge pus.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 When the wound has stopped bleeding, return to your work until it is completed; then look for signs of small scrofula, if any appear, cut and wash them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 If there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang out, without causing harm; then apply old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment to the wound, and heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 If you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary to gather the two edges of the wound and sew them together since there will be no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 You must understand how to cover the root of it [the ailment], draw pus from it, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce there where the pus emerges; and pierce as before described, in a downward direction, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar items so that it destroys what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an ointment made of enchanter's nightshade char until it heals.
de squinance	And for strangury (a difficult or painful urination), you must crush barley grain in wine and give it to drink, and add the juice of dried figs; this will ease the pain and make urination easier.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the size of the throat; however, I have never seen one do it in our land, and it is written in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinch, the incision of the throat called "epiglote" should be made; and no aid should be given by them, because all the veins and the opening of the sickness are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two almond-sized places.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the mouth, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three or four small openings through the center, between the third or the size of the opening depending on its thickness, not in the cartilage; and these places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there should be no cartilage, and the vessels are long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 If the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat all the way along, then cuts the cartilage as far as it reaches the chin; and removes the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the windpipe as we have said; and this has been demonstrated by the sectioning of the trachea that jumps through the broken place, and by the absence of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed during which doubt exists about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and close it entirely without damaging the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi says one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient has been judged dead and his spirit departed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then one should press on the epiglottis because the patient cannot cough, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and for this reason the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, which has passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it, as long as it was healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 A maiden took the knife and thrust it into her throat, piercing part of the windpipe's channel; I was summoned to heal her, but found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found blood flowing from it, but I realized that neither voice nor conduit could be heard or followed except through the throat, and the veins flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastily sewed up the wound and healed it until she was well; but the maiden's voice remained hoarse, and she recovered afterward; because of this, I say that in such a situation, one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like a bladder, and it is much more common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; where natural has no device.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental is in two ways: one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other type is similar to an abscess that comes from the artery; and it should be feared, and you should not force it unless in the small one, and prove and examine everything at the opening: if you find it similar to fatty tissue, and it does not move at all, strike it like you would a tumor, and pull it completely out if there is any; and close it well, and cure it as necessary, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of the nose
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways of ours exist, which I will describe all their resemblances; now it is necessary that I say the entire difference between a notch and an opening.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Dislocation is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the swelling has passed, then the fracture is complete, after which the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 A notch has no heat or fever or pain, and contains the sinus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a small opening and becomes large; and they are similar in two ways, either fatty or moist, and most are colored as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the cure of the knot, that you test and inquire first about every instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 The manner of incising an abscess is that you take a place more moist than you find in the abscess and rub your fingers back and forth until you feel that the pus has broken through, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the pus-filled cavity, but be careful not to let it spurt.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs into the wound, let it be colored as I have said for other abscesses; and if afterwards no moisture comes out from the incision, know that it is filled with fat; then make a cross-shaped incision, take hold of it with forceps, lightly peel off the skin on both sides and draw out the cavity where it lies, making sure you remove it whole with the fat; and if you cannot draw it out whole, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If anything remains, the pus returns repeatedly many times; if a little bit remains and does not bother you, apply some corrosive powder to the wound and hold it closed with bandages, apply hot things to soothe the abscess, treat it with other cures until it heals completely; and if it is large, make two incisions at the edges of the wound, and heal the resulting raw flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is beating against you or something else, rush and use vitriol powder instead, let it lie for 2 to 4 days until the wound heals, and allow the boil of blood to rest; then return to cover what was left uncovered with linen.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Here are the forms of the probing instruments, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three cross-shaped ones called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and there are also three types: large, medium, and small for encircling abscesses with fistula; and they are similar to needles used on witches, and made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and the yellow ones are more valuable, and they are more experienced in black plaster for encircling the edges of the fistula; and they are also in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wound's width.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of tumors are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and some tumors have two humps in three ways; and some tumors have three humps, and are also of three types; and some tumors have two humps, and tumors with one hump only, and are also of three types; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The chisels used for this are sharp and should not be cut from any other part, so as to avoid the vein or nerve; and these instruments called intromissories are placed in the hands of the patient, so that he does not feel it at the opening of abscesses; and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and one should not use any other but for charnu (charred or hardened) places such as legs, arms, breasts, and wounds, and sometimes another instrument similar to fistula drains is made, according to this shape, to bleed.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed sometimes at the place that heals from veins and arteries, and sometimes it is returned in this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to corrupt, until they appear like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, should do so according to this form described in this line b. up to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then remove the fat, apply medicine to the wound using corroding char, then bring together the two lips of the wound for stitching, and cure it until it is healed; if the breast sinks downwards due to its large size as happens with women, bind them in two stays, by two similar cuts; from this one will hold the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b up to line g; then remove the skin between the two lips, extract the fat, and apply what has been mentioned for stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, until it heals; if it does not heal or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest or due to the discharge of blood, you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it digests the remaining fat, then cure it until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscess on the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are treated as hard scrofulas with swellings that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those containing moisture must be amputated according to this form, from line b up to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire hole that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as needed until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound forms a hole, bring fire as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the cutting of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is injured and the skin above it thickens, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with a burst vein and an abscess; and if one recognizes this by the artery, then the abscess extends through the full extent; and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels tightly constricted; and when it is due to the vein, it swells upwards appearing round; and it is foolish to amputate such an abscess, and especially when it is under the joints and angles, and in the neck and around other joints, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Therefore, the treatment with iron must be avoided for those at the head, and similarly for those who are swollen from artery; they should make an incision through the skin along the length; then open the wound in a circular manner, carefully separating the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed; then push an awl beneath it and pierce it until the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries located in the temples; then press the area between the two ligaments with a probe until the swelling subsides, and separate the abscess; then apply the cure of heated iron bow, until the ligament bursts; then treat it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed; if the abscess is due to a vein opening, you should mark with your hand all that can be seen of the abscess to the entire skin, then pierce the awl beneath the area held in your hand, and let it pierce through, taking care to leave two threads; then tie the abscess as I have said, or ligament of one of the two parts with double thread; if you doubt that the threads will not burst, you should insert another awl all along the thread beneath the abscess at the incision of the first awl, and pull out the threads in four places; then crush the abscess until the excess subsides, then crush the excess fat and leave what is tied; then apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply cures of tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses of the nerves occur when they are injured or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this often happens in the shoulder and the thigh, and in all places where there are joints, and it is called a serious abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it occurs in various dispositions with pain; and when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely within the body, but under the skin; and it is quite silent from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and one who is in joints should not be covered by iron: perhaps contraction will occur; and one who is on the head or forehead, let the skin be spatulated.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, take tweezers and press it at its root; and if it is large, open it with an incision, peel off the skin, then cut open the bone and close the wound by stitching, and let it heal until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Hanging large swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; some are small and others very large; I have seen a man who had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were slit open, and moisture continuously ran out.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I weighed and found one of them to weigh eighteen ounces, and the other six pounds, and when you make an incision in it, you can see that the patient is moist, and the color of the intestine is pale and wet with a fine root; if you cut it open with a broad spatula, be sure the fire cautery is present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For at the thigh often comes too great discharges of blood, and if it threatens you, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and terrified of the incision with iron, take a thread well made, and tie it as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the thread of plumb until it stops the flow, and shrinks by it; and if the roots are large, be careful to cope with it yourself, but you can well cope with half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not copier the thread which is of dark color and of poor sensation and of milky eye.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this abscess hardened, and I will come to the treatment of leprosy hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of the wound or rupture of the sifac, and it is on the stomach and in some of the buboes, as happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind-inflammation; and if this is through the sifac route and from the opening of the buboe, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	and if it is from the intestine, then it is more varied, and when it is pressed with the fingers, it sinks back in, and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and easily opened when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and filled according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to wind-inflammation, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery or vein, or wind-inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary that you let the treatment be.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, you must instruct the patient to fasten his anus, and extend himself straight, then sign all around the belly; then command him to press himself gently between your hands, then go around the area that you have signed with a spatula, then cut half of the abscess above with a large spoon; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk and let the wound heal by itself; then open half of the incised abscess over the suture, and insert your finger and search for the intestine; if you find it tied by the suture, untie it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen; and if you find a belly button, take it with the spoon, and cut away the excess; and if the artery opposes or the vein, go gently around, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert them through the holes that you have made, and tie the abscess around with them in a cross shape that you are making perforate; then hold the abscess closed in four leagues above the needles, and if you see it open, remove the needles, and let the wound heal until it can close by itself, and cut away the dead flesh when it becomes soft and can be cut, then cure the wound as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said; and drain the pus or moisture that you find, then cure the area as necessary, and stitch the area.
dou chancre	of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the similarities of a sore and how to treat it with medicines and when to use iron cure; now let us say what a sore is like in marriage, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when sores are in places where they can be shaved like sores that occur in mammary glands and thighs, and similar places, it must be completely removed when it begins; but when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal it; no one has ever healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, it is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him purge if he has obvious fullness, then prepare the patient. That is, shave the area where the operation will take place; then pour boiling oil or other hot substance over the wound, and let all pus flow out; leave no bone or cartilage unbroken; and let all blood flow freely. And press well on the area with your hand or something else, and if the discharge of blood opposes the incision of an artery or a vein, cauterize it until the wound is closed; then heal it with other treatment until it heals.
de ydropisie	of the hydropieric disease
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have already said in the division the resemblance of edema, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured with iron: only this is excreted; it should not be touched by iron in these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of edema called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not help, look if the patient is weak or has another disease besides edema, such as dropsy of the belly and similar things; do not touch iron in that case because there is doubt. However, if you see the patient strong and he has no other disease except edema only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then act thus: lift the patient straight onto your hands, and the attendant presses the belly outward bringing the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the curved spatula according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And to make an incision in the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And it should not be so deep that it reaches the intestines when it is pushed in, and it must not be pierced; then check if the yolk-sac is adhered to the intestines: if this is the case, you must make an incision below the navel three fingers right of the nipple; and if the yolk-sac is due to liver disease, it should be made on the left side of the navel three fingers; and if it is due to the swelling, it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that the fluids do not run to the weak place; then pierce the skin with the instrument, push it, and withdraw your hand as much as the spatula between the skin and the sac, as when peeling an apple or something similar in quantity; then pierce the sac until the spatula reaches the watery place, and this is the amniotic fluid, then draw it out, and insert this instrument where it was described earlier:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and made of lead or light iron, and in the lower part, there are small holes; on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on another; and the head of the shoulder is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes make for carving a quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Above the head is the anvil, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends now on the instrument; empty then the space of half or one third part, because if you empty too much at that time, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit by the weapon, or he falls to the ground, or approaches death; but empty according to its strength, and according to what the dispositions of his strength indicate about the patient and his pulse; then draw the instrument and stop the water, it is now held due to the cauterization that closes the hole that I spoke about, that you make holes in this way; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering, and drain a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to wait too long but only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you have doubt about the patient, and you leave him much water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and anoint him with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is dry, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the removal of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There are times when children are born who have no foreskin or the foreskin is small or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary to pierce through the sponge-like substance very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then put the subtle foreskin of wood (clo) in place, and hold it and keep it for three or four days until he wants to urinate, if the opening is removed then let him urinate, and then replace it; and in case there is no need, because the urine that comes out does not close the opening.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 For the one whose ulcer is small, it is treated with a cloth of plugged-up wool, as we have said, it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those without ulcers in their place are blessed, for no one is born with an ulcer on the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before tying up the penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marris, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of work is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the penis and the buttocks at the same level, so that the testicle falls into the scrotum as required; and guard against excessive bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the wound, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis ulcers
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this albathe appears on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly sores; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you must pick them up once a week with a thin instrument, cut and clean them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top; then treat it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the anus is malignant (unhealthy), with pus-like discharge, then you must bring fire cure.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cauterized (burned), and if the anus is in a swollen state around the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then first remove the swollen anus that is inside; and when it heals, treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you treat it together, the testicles are not completely assured that they will not be punctured, and there comes blackness and corruption in its sheath and area; then everything that is black and corrupted must be cut away, and then lay it on a plaster of honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranates and other things, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if a discharge of blood comes out, apply the lunar cautery in this manner:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery also helps in these conditions: that is, discharge of blood and corruption; and if the testicles of the penis are corrupted and retracted, then you must insert or cause a canal made of wood from the plum tree, and make the patient urinate; and when the skin reaches the tip of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you must shave the hair with an instrument suitable for the task, until the ligaments are loosened, and release the testicles from all sides; and if this is difficult to discuss, then you must shave it at the spatula a little way along the penis and skin; then press gently between them, and put a thin linen cloth damp with cold water on it, so that it does not stick.
de la circoncision	of circumcision (when referring to the surgical procedure)
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not without reason and similar to other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will and specifically on infants, it is necessary that we do the best work and the easiest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day and all at once; however, there were those who feared it because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is cut, the one below may remain.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the coping is covered, and the pain is doubled; and at the circumcision of the tip of the member, it is not certain that the point of the tool touches the member; and by chance, the iron may slip during the circumcision of the nail, and ruin the work, and many times they are born without need for circumcision, and I have wanted this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the amputation which is made at the joint of the limb I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, cut it evenly all the way through; but let the veins be well narrowed around the skin; and let the method of the first operation be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you tie the thread only around the rod, and then let him rest in every possible way that you can; then let it be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the rod and blow or cut, and pull it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the ligature with a double thread, then tie below the knot to another knot; and hold it at the second knot by the cocket and index finger, and cut between the two knots, then untie the knot quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow freely, for this is the purification; and put powder on it and powdered egg white glues from a half-cooked egg tempered with rose water, confectioned with fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and heal it with another healing as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for healing is as follows: the two shoulders should be tender and should be cut, and they should also be as large as the fist equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of healing is when the flesh within is cut open; therefore, it must be stretched with the nail, so that the joint becomes abscessed; and equalize it, and if you cannot hold it with the nail, use pliers, and then equalize it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and that which is beneath the worm [abscess] is swollen, let it be left until the abscess subsides, and gently lance it; if it bursts as you can move it, do not injure the part of the worm, this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure the place with powder, as we have said treating powders, and if it bursts excessively, and goes above, it will not harm; so cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is caused by a stone, frozen blood, pus, or mucus (which we have mentioned in the division); and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over his knees; his feet should be placed on the back, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and then you should forcefully press the neck of the bladder to express the stone above it, so that the urine is released. And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction using an instrument called "siringue", which has the following form: made of subtle, light silver tube like a bird's feather; and the cannula should be one and a half palm lengths long, and it should be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the method of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, tie it to the end of a cotton or linen string, and push the string into the syringe; remove any excess thread and push it up to the tip of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and dip the tip in egg white and olive oil and warm water; then make the patient sit on the chair, anoint the bladder and penis with oiled moistened cloths; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the anus; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and the patient should feel it reaching the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide through which it goes is twisted; then tie the thread to the entire string and the urine will follow the string, then remove it and straighten the urine; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Illness of the bladder (or urinary system)
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	For scorchings or blood coming into the bladder (or urinary system), or pus is gathered there, and you see it distill acids and medicines, do all the instruments that are called "clepsydra" (hydrotherapy device). The shape is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the medicines are put into the correct position so that they can stop the swelling without adding anything, if it is possible to draw out the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you wish to empty your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw while pulling; if you draw out the moisture with the syringe, then forcefully push the plunger in; it will enter, and go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it; this is the form of the subtle clisterium used to clisterize the bladder: this is it.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is made of silver or iron, and the head [of the shoulder] is higher; and beneath lies the breast or the joints fall; then take a mutton bladder and fill it with the moisture that you use to soften the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread; heat the bladder filled with moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the plaster into the bladder, then hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture contained within, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, pierce it roundly; then forcefully insert the thread through these holes, assemble the circle like a thimble, fill it with oil and moisture and water, place it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of stones the methods and extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone implanted in the rain and all the signs, and in what stone one should operate according to size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; it opens a passage, enlarges the patient's urine channel, and pierces it many times, then ties it up; and many foundations occur because of these jumps; and children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is in the middle, for those who are between youth and old age; and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For sometimes it blocks the stone from being extracted.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take hold of the patient by the feet, and push down and move him below, so that the stone comes out to the front of the bladder and protrudes somewhat from the opening; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining towards the bottom; then press and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall to the touch of all [the body], wet your finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an infant, or you may use a tool, if the patient is an adult; and push it into its foundation, seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, squeeze it at the neck of the bladder; then press upward with your finger, and push it out where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the assistant to press the kidney with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then put the spatula covering it, so that it forms:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And between the coccyx and the foundation, do not dig it out but on the left side of the anus; and let it be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be at its foundation or at the top, and let it be cut through crosswise so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps you press too hard on the finger which is at its foundation, causing it to jump out suddenly; and know that there may be several stones or angles and edges; if there are many small ones like a bean, round and smooth, then it is easier to remove.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 To the one who has an angle or corner, make the incision larger; and if it does not burst open, you must pull upwards with pliers that resemble a saw at the tip, to forcefully dislocate the stone so it doesn't escape; or push in instruments of subtle curvature beneath the tip; and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, widen the small hole slightly, and if it is not yet broken, apply vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, push first on the largest at the bladder's neck, then strike, pull hard, and deal with the smaller ones afterward if there are any more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, you must make a larger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For the patient, there are two things that may happen: either he dies or urine comes out constantly because the loins cannot be joined; but despite this, you should try to draw or break with pliers as much as possible while pulling it apart; and when you have completed your work, apply incense, aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and tighten it, and cover with a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and cold rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess heat; then make the patient lie on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you undo it (the bandage), wash well the wound with oil and water, then apply the ointment of defyfinicon and the ointment of basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 If abscesses and corrosions come in the wound and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained because without urinating; then press your foot on the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder and corrupt it; then wash the wound with water and oils and linen, and help him in every way you know, until it heals; and it is necessary that all the hours you heal it, you bind the two thighs together and put the medicines on the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it is guided by the rod and thrust in, and urine cannot be expelled; heal this as follows: you should cut many times, but take care not to cut too deeply due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have previously experienced it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this form and with four angles pierced in one thorn:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the auger gently into the rod until it reaches the stone; and turn the auger in the stone slowly, bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon urine will come out, then press your hand on what is held back within the rod from the stone.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken and jumps with urine, the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, tie a thread under the stone and another above, then insert the rod towards the stone between the two ligaments, pull it out, release the ligament, clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens rarely that a stone enters a woman, and if it ever occurs, the cure is severe, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to examine herself, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third manner is when it happens that one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply lodged than the stone of the man, therefore it requires a deeper incision, and great fear is involved. If such a situation arises, you must take a midwife skilled in the art, if one cannot be found easily, then choose a subtle caste midwife; and present her a wise bailiff in the affairs of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and order her to perform what you command regarding the incision of the stone; and make sure that the woman is a virgin: then you must push your thumb or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, you should hold it with your thumb, and order her to press her left hand on the bladder strongly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is found, you must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike above the stone in the root of the thigh near the middle of the bone, where the stone is moved to appear, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your finger on top or below the stone, and let it be cut off at first small [amount]; then push the flesh into the cut, if you feel the stone is close enough to open the wound, and know that there are many kinds of stones: such as small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 Know the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 If it bleeds continuously, apply powdered vitriol and hold for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is expelled, and have tools as I told you in removing the stone from men to assist you in your task; and if it continues to bleed, and it is of the artery that was cut, apply powder over the area and bind with straps and bandages, and do not attempt again, for there is danger that the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wounds have closed, return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	of soft hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquose is not something other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called "white pus", and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane, if one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the bladder between the white pus that we have said, and this does not occur unless there is a rupture.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this accumulation is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes there comes a blow to the kidneys, and this moisture appears in various colors: either a color declining to yellow, or without red, black, or white, and this happens more frequently; and these are signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white like we have said, it is an abscess, and it grows long as the figure of an egg, and do not open the kidneys, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the cloth, the abscesses are caused with a part of the egg, and because of this it is thought to be another egg; and if the moisture is between the hide of hocks and the white yolk, one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly, from which the form is as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, the one who comes after the incision judges what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be anesthetized to our power and the filling of his body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly elevated, and put many layers of cloth beneath him; then lie on his left side, and command the assistant to stand on the right, and stretch the arm at one of the two ribs nearest the hocks; then take the cautery iron, strike the hide of the hocks along its length down to the bone, and make your incision straight in describing the hide of the hocks up to the white yolk, and peel it off delicately according to our power; then pierce the yolk completely with water and drain all the water, and then put your onions, and close the yolk; and do not touch the bone, but only the yolk; strike all around it carefully, if you do not strike it skillfully, the water will return; and if the egg bursts during your work, repair it in its place when you have completed the work of the yolk; then bring together the two leaves of the hide of the hocks into a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted with some other disease, you must tie the vessels that are suspended, taking care of the discharge of blood; then cut the kidney and remove the bladder, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches; if you strike the other part as you have done the first equally, then suck out the blood, and place damp linen in oil of roses on it; and place another damp linen in wine and oil on the other side, and place two stones on it, and cover with doubled cloths, and tie it all together with a suture according to this shape:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two pieces of cloth, and use damp linen like this shape and sew them together in the girdle of the arms, and one of the shoulders takes it up to the bottom, and the other at the hilt part; and the other shoulder on the opposite angle, and gather all together in the knot of the arm band; and sometimes the cautery ramie is used instead of iron cutting, and you take a subtle cautery tool, strike the skin of the shoulders, and heat it as we have said, so that the white pus containing the ulcer is exposed; then take the cautery in this shape, and pierce the exposed pus with it, and peel off the skin using this hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cup in all ways that you can, as long as it heats up; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg (yolk); and know that this work is more effective; and beware of discharge of blood, and be aware that the works of cutting; and if anything happens contrary to this, or abscess erupts or discharge of blood or something else, cure what happens contrary to it, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to undergo this procedure due to its horribleness, then perform perforation, as I have told you, and know that when you are certain by the signs we have said that the abscess is located there, you should make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the area below the entire spatula's width, and insert the perforation along the length of the body; let the wounds be wide enough for all the pus to flow out; then place cotton over the area, hold it in place, and allow the remaining pus to drain; then cure the wound until it is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to escape from the opening of the wound, you must apply a feather or the instrument used to treat dropsy, as its form has been described earlier; enlarge the wound's opening, know that the pus will return, and be aware that it is collected after six months or more, and when it is collected as described earlier, the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the cheeks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the section of this [medical] procedure, there is fear in many cases, so it seems more appropriate to leave it [the procedure]; and I will tell you the work and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, especially in the bowels; and this happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 By excessive sour and acute fluid that is spread in the lungs, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and no pain is found, and it is a painful abscess; and perhaps there are some abscesses swollen with pus and hard, of this color, and sometimes it comes from an artery, or swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from an artery, it can be known by the color of the abscess hot, when you press on it with your hands; and it should not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 One who is swollen with the vein is recognized by his disposition at the expression of the fingers, and can well make an incision on this resemblance, and on other things; it is that you cut the flesh of the hump, then the egg is above, and the yolk flows out white, and deliver the suspensorium from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the egg is already boiled with these things born, then you must draw out the egg and chop it; if it is raw or inside the vessels, where it is within the bladder, you must deliver all that tender stuff and chop it.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the pimple is hidden inward, you should cut it all and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply linen cloth wet with rose oil and wine to the wound, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the cheeks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enveloped by an envelope resembling a boil, with the softening of the fingers, and the patient groans heavily as he goes; and the cure for this disease is extremely dangerous like the one before, and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the suspension device for the eyes below his feet, against all the vessels close to the vein, and mark them with the master; then stretch them out fully. Then you cut into the artery sharply wide through the vessels until they are exposed, and then peel off from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the temples' arteries; then insert a double-threaded needle and tie it to the first point where the blood has flowed, and tie it directly to the other end; then pierce it in the middle straightly according to the length of the body, and drain out the corrupted fluids; then treat the wound as you would a bowel injury, so that no vessels burst from one of the eyes; because there is no harm in this, but if all the vessels burst, you must withdraw the eyes from all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot heal.
de la routure dou syfac	of the dislocation of the thigh
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The appearance of this hernia is through an opening that comes from the incision or extension on the abdomen in the area of the inguinal region, so that the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the corners; and this rupture is either due to the incision or the extension of it, and these two types of causes may occur for various reasons: either by impact, jump, strain, lifting of heavy objects, etc., and similar things; and the signs that it is an extension of the inguinal hernia are that it occurs gradually, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal in size up to the full extent, because the hernia follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the incision of the intestine, which causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin near, and this is due to the rupture of the internal organs and the body going into shock due to the incision.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are twisted with it and held in place, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, fear is present, so one must escape from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	1. And the manner of work is that you command the patient to pull out the intestine with their hand from inside through the wound, if it can be inserted; then hold its neck between your hands, and lift the thighs; then position the blade above, and cut all the hide of the shoulders long; then push into the hollows of the waist bones according to what is needed for opening the wound, and make them such that the eyes can come out; then scrape the fat that is under the hide of the shoulders, until the white fat becomes completely exposed from all sides; then put your index finger where the shoulder bone is, in the place that is between the white fat that is under the hide of the egg, and the second fat, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second fat; and move your hand to the right inside the shoulder blade, and position the white fat on your left hand, and lift the egg towards the belly with all the fat towards the waist; and command the assistant to stretch the egg upward, and loosen what is in front behind the ligament; and check with your fingers if any intestine is enveloped or hard white fat, and if you find anything, put it in the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and put it in the back part of the fat, which is after the hide of the shoulders; after the waist, then pierce the bones that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then assemble one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the fat, which we have said is under the hide of the shoulders, with a strong rope of two parts; then wrap the bones with the threads, and tie them in two parts, so that no vassals who feed them can enter into it, unless the abscess does not come out; and place the rope according to the first rope length, and after these two ropes leave the fat that is under the shoulder blade to be large by one finger width; and after all that, shape according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part that is under the hide of the shoulders, as much as it will allow, and curve it, as we have said above; then bring moistened linen into oil and put it on the wounds, and place the rope that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white pustules are cauterized as we have said before, after incising, due to fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens and leave the ligament until it chooses to come out by itself; if it delays in falling off, you should irrigate it with hot water, and apply as we have said, until it comes out; then treat the wound from another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of soft hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I never saw anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like the graft which is joined with the bone, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting them lightly on top of it; then break it in the middle, and treat the abscess from those who work on it, until the vessels come out; and treat it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Sometimes it comes about in an abscess as we have said, and open the hole; do not draw out any of the intestines with the feces, and if there is some drawn out, it is a mistake and repair it every hour; and yet if it stays too long in this spot, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestine is drawn out; this happens due to the extension of the fistula which is in the abscess, as we have said, for it is extended, then becomes softened and swollen the hole and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies down supervised on his back between your hands, then break the swollen abscess hole from side to side according to the thickness of three fingers; and then extract the fistula which is under the skin that surrounds it, then take the rod and put it over the visible part of the fistula; and press it to the stomach, then stretch the two visible parts of the fistula on the head of the rod, and press them both; then extract the head of the rod, and do not cover or extend the fistula or any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the graft of the intestines; then treat it by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, if it is punctured and cures the wound, let it heal while it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The siphon is constricted, without any appearance in the opening, and the cauteries are moved closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin on the cheeks
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin on the cheeks becomes soft in some men, because the charms that are inside are softened and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one sees it needs to be cured, to make the patient lie on their back, and to cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then bring the two lips together at a stitch, and if you see, sew first the excess skin that has been softened at 2 or 4 strong stitches; then cut between the stitches, and the wound is cured as other wounds, until it heals, and sew the thread.
dou chastrement	the punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Know that charms are mentioned in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary except for two reasons: the first is that mirrors in a charm respond when asked and provide a cure; and the second, because we often have need of castration of certain animals to aid us, such as cows, sheep, goats, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Therefore, charms are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting (or slitting).
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the case of the charm by attraction, we sit the animal in hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed; then we take hold of it with our hand, keeping it restrained until it is calmed and no longer feels anything.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the branding of size: you must mark the beast, and press the hide of the cheeks with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike each ear with the brand when they are well scorched; leave any small spot unbranded and the subtle one that is on the vessel; and this kind of branding is dried out rather than the one made by attraction, because at the attraction something from the cheeks may remain, which causes the beast to desire lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism is according to two types of men: one in which there is an opening between the two cheeks as the figure of woman's nature, having hair and sometimes it urinates in court.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another way is in women, and it has above the penis as a rod, and they copulate.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment of the man and woman is that you copulate the joined genitals all, and heal them as other wounds; in another way, from men whose urine jumps through the skin of the penis, there is no healing.
de la tentigene	the treatment
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Tension is a joined genital on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have one as large as a hand, and this is healing.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 You must dye the excess of the tension with your hand or onions and copulate lightly; do not go too far in as it may cause bleeding, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed; and another character that comes from the wife's mouth, and is pushed out, and sometimes jumps violently, and resembles a cow, and because of this, they call it "the disease of cows" by the ancients.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary that you cut [it], as we have said before, and treat it until it heals.
de erratique	Of a dislocation
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of woman is not detected, or it is small, and its nature is either by birth or accident due to illness that comes in; or it is by artificial means such as a charm or subtle or thick syrup, and it is made completely within marriage, or outside, or whether it is; and they must prevent conception, delivery, and avoid the flowers having [the child]; and this knowledge can be determined by observing the vaginal discharge.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the stoppage is close to appearing, either at your hand or eye.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is by subtle syrup and the stoppage is close to the liver, hasten and do this: put your two index fingers together and the woman should be lying on her back with her legs spread; then form the two livers, so that the subtle syrup is rounded, and cover the stoppage; then take linen and moisten it in oil, and place it on the area, and let the woman lie there each day until she does not conceive.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the dislocated joint is hard and thick, you should cut it with a chisel resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocated joint is made of flesh, suspend it with a rope and cut it; have prepared medicines that stop blood, such as hog's lard, dragon's blood, incense, together with many eggs; then bring a large bandage, so that the wound cannot heal; and let it remain long, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when flesh comes in the wound (or abscess), it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscess is inflamed.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an abscess swollen at the marriage (joint), one must not do anything to it.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without the cort (cortex) treatment, and when hemorrhoids become old, they swell; and we have said in the division what they look like, their signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and the swelling, when they are completely in the joint (maris), and do not appear to touch, should not be treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those at the mouth of the joint can be felt, these are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore you should put the woman in a cold house, then pull out the swelling with pliers at its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine that stops bleeding such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press her feet to the opening for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding comes forth, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and grape bark and ivy leaves and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it bleeds, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If it does not bleed, make him (the patient) lie face down and the armpits should be wounded; then take linen, wet it in the juice of plantain or elder with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess has rested, treat the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" should be red and resemble a rough chief, if necessary cover it as I have said in the text; and then heal it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	"of the anus abscesses"
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many forms of abscess come in the marriage, such as boils, pus-filled abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, in this treatment, it is necessary for me to describe the abscess that appears in marriage, which is not one of those that swell; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, and filled with heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Do not rush to pierce it immediately, but let it heal as much as the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have two chairs where he can lean, and support his back and legs at the parts away from the leg; and let his knees be spread open, and place his arms under his thighs and tie them well with a good rope; then bring the pustule towards the right side, and bring the instrument used for opening the abscess, from which follows its shape; and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, that you pierce the tip first to know the depth of the abscess, so that what enters with the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient; if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm him; and it is necessary that he places the horn of the instrument above, and marks the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess opens, and one touches it with a soft hand, it must be covered with a poultice of lard; and when the boil is empty, you should put wet, oiled bandages in the wound, or green, dry, cooked poultices; and put the poultice edge from the wound to the full depth of the marrow, and put over the marrow and over the clean, oiled linen bandage soaked in vinegar or malvish that has been cooked; then cure it for two days after the application until it is healed; and sometimes lift the marrow and the wound with a poultice of vinegar and honey, and then with vinegar or long-cooked arnica or Aristolochia roots; then return to the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed over in the marine, you must avoid burning it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 Firstly, one must know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs when you see the woman straining downwards and desiring to urinate: then hasten the child to be born; now understand that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it issues from under the head, and follows with him; and when you see these signs, you must gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends above her head, then it follows with it, and the membranes of the womb are emptied of its superfluities through good cleansing; and this which comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 Sometimes it happens over the limbs, and the torso or shoulders, or the hands, or over the abdomen, or back, and is turned accidentally around the neck, or in other malicious ways; therefore, it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and skillful in these matters, and aware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes down naturally towards its head and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the vital forces of the infant are weak, make her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the small spatula (spatumile) between her fingers as shown in the figure:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And cut the second rib, and strike at its nail until the moisture that is within it comes out; and grasp the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, you must fumigate the woman with mustard seed oil of sage; then make her take and vomit of castor oil, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour; now the child will descend.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 If the two hands come out, it is necessary that you reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot be put back in, place the woman on the chair, and lift her legs up; then tip the chair onto the ground, and bind the woman so she does not scream during the process; and if the hands still cannot be put back in, and the child dies, cut open the mother's belly with the knife placed before, extract the child, and reset again.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 The birth of the child is on its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out on its feet, you must push it upwards; and then gradually turn it, until it is level; then take one of the feet and stretch it gently, bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 It cannot jump up to any knees, if it commands to catch it, and makes it vomit with the throat-constriction; if it leaps away, may it be so if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Thus it should be done gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come away as we have, say that you take musk-juice from the altar and oil of sage, and melted pitch, and grind all in the mortar; then put the nature of a woman inside this ointment and apply it externally on the place; then make her sit in hot bath up to her chest; and when she is softened below, let him tie her with mirrr-gauze and place it under, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the chair, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and press her stomach gently, for the infant jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the infant comes in this form, place the child's hands palm to palm; then support its head on its neck, and hang its legs downwards, and lay it on the bed; fold its hands palm to palm, and then hold its hands above its belly, and push its hips out, until it is aligned below; if the infant does not slide, take its feet and straighten them, then straighten its belly upward, then put your hands; rock the baby gently, and command the woman to seize herself until the infant is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the emergence of the child which comes out one hand wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to find a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then lift the woman and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed and spread her legs widely; then apply the mustard plaster that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the stool, then study how to bring back the hand; and deliver the baby according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and command her to seize herself until the infant is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	The issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the servant holds his hand, then turns it bit by bit and pulls it gently; and when it is even, place natural muscle balm of high altitude and oil on it, as we have said, then command him to move it bit by bit; and when you have done this, make him sit on the chair, and command him to grab it; and make him vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, treat everything else.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When the child comes forth in this manner completely, you strike the afterbirth on your nail until the moisture is evacuated; and if the placenta rises to its place and to its neck, you strike it so that it is not retained and the placenta dies; then push the child down as far as you need to, and command the woman to grab it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the birth of twins   (or from twin pregnancy)
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born often and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange and rarely happens.   (It is common for twins to be born, but it is rare for more than two to be born at once.)
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 Two are strange things, and do not live unless named; I know them, as they can multiply themselves, and are driven away by the one who invented them, which is linked to filth; and sometimes they come out naturally like worms, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they come out violently, treat them as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do as much as is needed to heal it.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the marriage of one to two or three or four or five or six, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise healer; it is necessary that the balm knows this, for sometimes similar things happen; do as needed according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you care for the woman in labor with a dead child or an empty womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to manual work; then you must know if the woman is of pure virtue, and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should lie on her back, and her chest inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and the attendant should strain her with both hands, or tie her to the bed so she is not treated in the removal of the child; then anoint the mouth of the dead child with moist oils mixed with musk, aloe, and flax seeds, then anoint the attendant's hands with these oils and these musks; then insert them gently into the dead child's mouth, ensuring that they reach the desired location, and be careful if the anus is exposed as it should descend on the head; then pierce the anus in the eyes or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or in the forehead or near the sides or near the costal region, and if the expulsion is from the feet, then pierce or press them gently at the middle of the ribs; and you should hold the anus with your right hand, and place the horn between your left-hand fingers, and insert it fully into any of the locations mentioned above, until it reaches the empty space; and this is the shape of the anus:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then drive it against the other one, whichever is needed, so that the extraction is equal; and then adjust it equally by moving from both sides to make them move out, and keep the ends pointed for movement, as in the figure below:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If part remains, then press one of your thumbs against oil and push into that part while pulling the other; if no part remains, place the splint higher up the limb and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 If one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be returned due to the tension, then you should wrap it with a cloth until it comes out completely; then break it at the joint of the sole or at the toe, and do this for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the birth passage, or if there is a sharp assembly of the skull, you must insert the pointed sponge between your fingers, and make the skull open and extract the water; or you may use the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and in the same manner do for the child naturally swollen; then pull the bones apart with pliers, and if the head jumps out and it is held back by force, it should be cut, until the moisture which is in a worse position issues; and if it cannot issue, hit it with pieces as hard as you can. And if it is inflated in the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is swollen above its feet, the treatment is light and the repositioning to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is protruding in the abdomen or the anus, you must push it back into place covered with a cloth over your hand; and with the abdomen or anus, press until the moisture that is there corrects itself; and if another member has been dislocated, and the head remains, you must put the thumb of one hand inside the vagina, and guide it until the opening of the vagina; then you put in your index finger or middle finger and guide it further; and if the opening of the vagina is narrowed due to abscess that has come, you should not push, instead you should administer moist and greasy things; and you should administer ointments, and oil in warm, softening and soothing manner.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, do as we have said in our previous advice for a live birth; and if there is no power to do so, tear it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, do as we have said in treating abscesses that come in marriage; and if bleeding comes out, it should be restrained with tight binding, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb had killed an infant, then consulted another physician about it, and the other revived the infant.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess appeared in the buttock and swelled so much that it opened up and began to rot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought about it for a long time, but could not stop the wound from bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place strong plaster, and from it comes out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, because the stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I wish to treat the wound, and break many bones as long as the woman is in a good position; and the woman survives for a long time in this state, and then after a little while, a piece of pus comes out; and I do not remember this chapter being used except when a master finds something strange that he knows how to treat.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the marriage back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the screw press, with which one measures books; and at each turn, both heads of the two levers move.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The cornets should be more slender than the restrainer, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the rod should be wide, and the edges of the rods, and a half palms long; and between the two limbs there should be two joints of the same rod, which are to be fastened at both ends, half a palm long or slightly more; and these two joints are placed in the mouth of the patient for opening when turning the horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another shape, having a slimmer and lighter appearance, should be made from a rod of ebony or boxwood resembling pincers; and it should have two prongs, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the patient's mouth with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread apart, then place the two prongs side by side in the patient's mouth, and hold the base of the instrument beneath her thighs; then use your hand on the entire instrument, as you have done with the pincers equally, according to the quantity that you wish to open the woman's mouth, until the ball does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all covered and multiplied according to their resemblance; and when the surgeons have prepared them, he works more quickly, and higher for humans due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Never despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her lochia (afterbirth), and then make her vomit with medicines, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; if she jumps because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, you take a spoon or cup, and put warm water or covered pot with herbs that can open the mouth of the patient (woman), such as rue, anise, chamomile, camphor, centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over fire; then put a cup or spoon from the pot, and the other end into the woman's mouth, and hold it until the vapors enter the patient; then make her vomit as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient jumps up quickly.   \n\nSi ung de ses membres est ostez, si com avons dit, se le pointe et fai grosse pele pour que il ne refreigne, et on met en la plaie ung cestui qu’il ne demurra pas; si li coupe la veine ou il demande, et aucune fois ne demeurez pas.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this cure and does not heal as commanded, tell the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk-scented water from aloe, then put it on nature, and let it be seconded; and when she has found it, take and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the man does not resist extraction; but it must be moved gently to right and left, then pull; it will come out and will dislocate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the man's mouth is stretched out (dislocated), we have said the cure for cleaning and fumigation of herbs; and if it does not heal from everything that we have said, then make sure you do not pull it out; but it must be tied to the woman's thigh, then clisterize with tetraformulated ointment; if he will come back and heal, but even so, when she can, she will emit a bad odor from her stomach and head, and infect the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, fumigations suitable for this are necessary: no ancient has proven fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it looks like glass resembling a dog's head, and put the delicate neck into nature, and widen the shoulders over the fire; and let there be fumigation above the coals, and the tainting until it is spoiled, and repeat another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation   (This line does not have a complete sentence in Old French and is likely an incomplete or fragmentary text)
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born without a foundation pierced, instead it is stopped up with a fine stitch: therefore, when balancing, the stitch should be pierced at its proper place, and not with a sharp splinter; ensure that the lapse is not touched; then put damp linen in wine and oil, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will burst open again, place a splint of wood and leave it for many hours, and remove it when the child is seen to go into the bedrooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes comes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover the affected area: if it is a wound, as we have said, with the lard of pig.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come below the foundation are nodules, and those that grow above the foundation escape from under it or in the space between two parts, if with one fistula or more; and when this nodule is old, it becomes inflamed, and moisture wakes blistering or fine boils, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by those who notice whether there is excretion or windiness when the patient passes excrement, and in some cases it jumps upwards.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it has fistulas that penetrate to the bladder and halfway up the penis; and they reach to the joint of the thigh and notch of the pelvis.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one knows the fistula at its foundation, but not persistently: and it is that you bite your finger or foundation, and bite a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no tortuousness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If it is tortuous, push a fine plaster of thin linen or horse hair until you feel the plaster or the hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no purulent discharge or wind or worm, as we have said: know that it does not perforate; hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or the passage for urine, if it discharges urine and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is perforated up to the knee joint, then the pus comes to the surface; if there is no tortuosity and the pain subsides, it is that it has healed of itself, and there is no need for medicine or ointment; and in these persisting fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish healers who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In one who is not paralyzed and not old, seeking health through the use of iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; then lift the legs up to the thighs, and incline the thighs towards the belly; afterwards place a tent of pitch or wood, if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels pain around the foundation (pelvis), then it is necessary that you place your finger there to see if the tent has pierced it; and if you feel a hole or flesh, then it is paralysis; do not touch it as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 One must be able to heal some, but it happens little; and the aid one does, if it is that one heats the cautery subtle according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and puts it all hot in the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred fibers are burned, which resemble a feather of an eye; and then cure it with moistened tents in butter, until that char is gone, then cure it with ointment soothing and healing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If this can be healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise and if the fistula is entered but not pierced to its base, and between your finger and the fistula there is a thick cover of skin or leather, and you see the fistula under this covering with care; if the base of the fistula is struck, and pushed towards the fistula, and then the cautery after, until it reaches the end of the fistula; and the fistula will be released, and charred; then burn the fibers that resemble a feather of an eye, and no more remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the flesh is cut open by itself and there is no exit, cauterize it with fire or medicinal ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery brings about two good things: burning of these attached sores, and the stopping of blood and removal of moisture; then it heals wounds wet with tents filled with butter or cooked oats, until the flesh boils in the butter; then heal the wound with strong hot salve for dry char, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it will heal and not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes out to the full depth of the foundation and is separated from the body, push your finger or a probe into it and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent, and between it is the cloth or the silk or sores, which is about to be pierced, there should not be any fear but faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you strike deep down, or if you can, place tents and heal as before; do not go too far, so as not to cover the foundation that holds the tent, and let the abscess come out by itself with will; then heal it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering from above the foundation, either through a tent or any other instrument provided; then disinfect the pus-filled wound in the sore, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the foundation part: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fistulas are formed in this way: and it is when you push the skin into the fistula, and it is where the tip protrudes beneath the outer layer of skin above; then take a pointed probe of this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	Then insert one thread twisted into two, and push the tent into the fistula to its full length (?) at the end of the thread.    --> Then insert one thread twisted together, and push the tent all the way into the fistula up to the end of the thread.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is perforated along the edge of the foundation within, then pull the thread from that opening so that you push your finger or foundation and draw out its head; bring together the two ends of the thread, squeeze them against each other, and leave for a day or two; hold them together as often as they pull apart, until the threads cut through the char that are between them and the pus is released; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.   Car il est doulent et grant peril por li laisser ouvir et non percier.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not advisable to cover the wound while it is still gaping, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the spur-shaped spina from which a fistula is made is very sharp at one end and blunt on the other; and yet, it should not be struck where it should not be struck, as you can see here.
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Abscesses are of two kinds: either they are within the foundation like a piece of resin, with small and large ones, and inside there is blood, and there is one or more, and they are displaced from their foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are displaced have little moisture, and at the same time or a little citron juice or blood, and have the color of flesh. The cure for these abscesses that are within the foundation is to command the patient to strain while in bed until the foundations subside, and the pus appears; if you hurry, bind it with tweezers or your nail, then strike its roots; and if the pus cannot be held because of the moisture, take a piece of linen or cotton or a piece of camel hair; wrap them around it and hold them with your fingers, then strike, and sprinkle some hot powders on top instead of cautery; or you can cauterize as described in the chapter on cautery, after which you treat other wounds until they are healed. If the foundations cannot be expelled, clisterize the patient with a bitter and sharp clisterum to wash what is around the foundation, so that it may come out openly; but if the patient resists, and if the pus has left the foundation, the cure is easy; you can grasp them with tweezers or tweezers, strike them, and treat as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you stitch the wound in this manner: take twisted thread, insert it into a needle, then pull the thread up and pierce the needle from the other side, turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, making it wide; tighten the thread, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving the excess blood to flow out; then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on the wound foundation, and command the patient to rest; then let it be until it drains, and when it stops draining, treat it with ointment and other treatments until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The drying of fires or foundations
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often happens the drying of fires in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine has no effect.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you burn the bark of a willow twig or your fingernail with a hot iron so it does not get wet; then cure it until it heals as needed; and if it cannot heal, repeat the shaving more strongly than before, until it bleeds and is burnt; then cure it until it heals.
dou fremit	the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Formica (an insect) is a small growth found before the chest, and it grows very deep; sometimes it strikes the throat, and one feels it like death by shivering, and it spreads throughout the body, more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is that you take a reed of goose quill or a strong feather, and place the reed on the shivering, until it envelops it completely; then turn your hand along the entire length of the reed until it covers the shivering completely and drives it in deep, burning its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish to do so, make it like a catapult of tar or iron in this form, and let it be subtle within and traverse above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, for fear of causing pain, and press gently; And if you wish to cauterize the trembling (of a wound), as is explained in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the clyster (enema)
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they make an enema of silver or arsenic, or melted tar or honey; and sometimes they make small and large instruments according to the ones brought in.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when treating children who are weak and suffering, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cluster is both small and large; it should be placed over a wide area where the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And it should have an opening where the abdomen is joined, as you see, and the chest should be pierced within; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other one; and fill the abdomen with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it all around with small holes; and between each hole there should be some space, then insert strong thread through each hole crosswise, and close the abdomen like a bag; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to an instrument with a strong thread, then bandage; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the bandage with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the ministers should examine it with both hands until it is completely visible, then remove the bandage, and make the patient lie down on his back, and if the medicine appears to come out, hold it as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, it will be a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plaster him in case of intestinal disease and the medicine hastens to heal, continue to apply it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are ulcerated or abscessed, whether they are soft like in children, then use a subtle enema; and this is the form of the subtle enema when the skin is stretched:
des plaies	for wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds; now I will tell you about the care of hands and medicines, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to how they were made, and according to the places where the wounds were made, and because of what they were caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things that wounds are made from are by hitting with a stone, cutting with a sword or knife, lance or mace or similar things; or whatever is made according to the body parts, such as wounds on the neck, head, thigh, belly, liver and similar limbs; I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will start with simple wounds of the head, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound or an injury comes, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to arrow puncture or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large; raise doubt about abscess formation: if there is pus from the wound, make it heal immediately from the head itself, even if blood comes from the wound; let the patient empty himself of excessive wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it does not want to heal, reduce his food intake, do not drink wine, and do not eat meat or char; place on the wound if pus comes from it, a slightly dampened woolen cloth in rose oil only, or in stiptic wine; if there is no pus, place on the fresh wound that has not moved by the air, a powder (that I will say a little later); and if the fire has moved it, place some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	If the wound is large like a sword's size and the lips cannot be brought together by force, bring them together by stitching, as I shall explain in abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed to the bone, pierced and does not stay in place, press it; then cure the wound with medicine, put hard fat instead of skin, and command the patient to eat thick foods such as cooked heads (testes) and wheat, also like peas, etc.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if the skin or flesh becomes rotten and is not attached to the bone, press it all out and throw away the pus, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped by medicine, squeeze it (the affected area), and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: and it is that you put this powder which hardens as soon as the arrows have moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and grind the mixture finely, then apply it to the wound and press it firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it unbandaged if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes they do this with only charcoal when there is no incense or the blood of a dragon, but the wound has not healed over yet.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the fire has burned the wound, especially in that case, do not put this powder on it; instead, apply some digestible ointments or barley flour poultice made with water and honey, until it turns green; then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if a bone breakage comes with the wound, and it is small, draw it out with fine forceps; and I will tell you afterwards about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If there is a wound in the neck and it is simple (uncomplicated), there is no difference between this and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is a nerve, there should be no other device but to let it heal naturally, and not put anything restraining, for it hurts the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body; but let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed in sweet oil, and boiled water also washed in this way, and other stones of the same kind, according to this manner, and immediately moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then wrap it with strips of linen until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and inflamed and full of pus, pierce it or lower it; if the arteries are cut, bleeding follows, so cauterize, lance, and cauterize as needed; if the spine in the throat is cut, or the trachea, and the windpipe is guarded, so that the meat goes upward to the throat and does not touch the throat but is replaced according to its natural shape; then press gently, and leave it for several days, then treat with rejected ointments until it heals; if the wound presses on the bone, cut it; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them all out as you can, and leave those that you cannot have, until the wound discharges and is drained and aligned; if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder over it, as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, check if there are any signs of pus coming from the wound: then you know that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder immediately nor bind it for the blood that prevents coagulation, and let it return to the heart, and leave the patient; but apply attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound for drawing out moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or more; no spasm, bad tremor of heart or other signs of pus will come; and when you see good conditions, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat the wound and other treatments as long as it is healthy; if it cannot heal, then open it immediately, since there is a fistula; cure it as necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, large, or in the back, then treat what is in front of it; if it is large, stitch it; if it is small, use powder; and if it is pressed against the bone and has pieces, either clean the wound and pull out any loose parts; but if they are not loose, let the wound drain until it heals naturally. The judgement for other wounds on different body parts is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	the dislocation of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	1. The dismemberment of the abdomen is great, medium, and small; from a large wound, the intestines sometimes protrude once, or the edges of the intestines, making insertion difficult; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in place if not done carefully; as they inflate suddenly when they feel cold, and this makes it harder for them to go back in, and therefore a medium-sized wound is better, because the intestines can be manipulated more easily back into their place than with other wounds. And know that the incision of the abdomen is according to four methods: the two common sutures occur in the abdominal suture, and the sutures of the other body parts and the other specific ones are common for the other wounds; but they are more appropriate with the abdominal suture, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes from it, it is easy to treat, as there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, heat it in one of these ways: either moisten a sponge or dampen a cloth only in warm water, or you cook in hot wine and cinnamon and juniper and thorns, and hold the intestines until the swelling disappears; and sometimes do this with restraining wine, and it should be allowed to cool to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling spread, moisten the intestine with warm or hot water and bitter herbs, for thus the entrance is opened a little; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to be allowed to cool before cutting, but we should not cut too much without necessity; and this is the tool for splitting: pierce inside the hump and spread outward, and look at this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is widened and the intestines fall out, put them back in place according to their natural form in their proper position, if you have the power to do so, for it is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is in the part below the stomach, you must make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the stomach, then you should raise the head and the feet more than the parts below, and similarly, when the rupture of the stomach is in one of the two sides, you must focus on ensuring that the damaged side is higher than the other; and in this way, you should attend to both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 Small wounds, place what is necessary for you, then take a compassionate person with a hand to treat the wound, and bring the lips together; this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more than one, depending on the width of the wound, then leave a gap at the edge of the wound and insert a needle where there is strong thread; pierce the two layers of skin with the two layers of tendon, which is under the skin, from that side to the other, until you have made a hole through it, and bring together the three edges; then tie a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two edges of the wound accordingly, then leave a gap and insert another needle; tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue this way according to your needs for needles, until the entire wound is held together; let the needles be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, because very fine needles pierce through all the flesh and too thick ones cannot enter well: this is why they should be medium-sized. And do not insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so as not to pierce and open the wound before it heals; then clip the needle heads, so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place weights or bandages on the needle heads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound heals. This method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because a single needle or two can perform a second stitch if necessary, and it is that you bring together the layers of skin and tendon with one needle where there is strong thread; and when you have pierced all four sides, remove the needle to the part where you began, in the way cloth is sewn; leave space between each stitch the thickness of a minor eggshell. This stitching method is called suturing by men, and I sewed a wound with it on a man who had a belly wound caused by a knife, which was more than one palm wide, and the intestines were about two palms deep inside, and the wound was within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned the intestine when it had been twenty-four hours, and the wound healed for fifteen days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 They had judged him that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not heal it with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I placed cotton old twice a day on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and pierce from the outer part to inside straight; when it has pierced the skin right through, place the tip or stitch of the needle where you put in the needle, and pierce it again from the inner part outwards to the outer; and the meaning of this stitching is that you sew as a skinner does fur, and leave one side open, then take up the other side until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second manner of stitching, as Galen calls it, is when two parts are brought together naturally, and one end of the skin is applied to the other end, in this way: insert a needle or the point of the mirror, and pierce only that place; leave the two ends of the skin; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part to the inner, through the two ends of the skin; then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner, in the two other holes that are opposite each other on the other side; and this is the moving manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens uses this phrase and it is borne out by all witnesses, that the abdomen should be sewn with two needles, each with thread; one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew bags; and know that when the wound is within the abdomen, the stitching is more difficult than elsewhere on the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgement of the wound is similar to that of other wounds: and it is that when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, after the arrows have moved it, then you restore the intestine and the purse; afterwards put powder strengthening flesh on it, and if the arrow has moved it, then put any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and sew up the flesh, and bind the sifac, and apply the mirach; then treat the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then immediately put old cotton on it, and turn it two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You need no other medicine for many conditions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound may infect the main members, then moisten thin linen in warm oil or rose oil, and put it around the injuries, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or swelling, and this often occurs, then clisterize with black wine, especially when the swelling comes up to the intestines; and pierce it through, and know that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is because of the swellings in the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the gristle (sinew) leaps from the wound, reset it in place as an intestine does while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned black, you must cut away the black part where blood does not come out, because there are veins and arteries there; then take hold of what is between the ligaments, and hang the two heads (of the bones) hanging from the part below the wound towards outside to facilitate the extraction when the gristle leaps, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	of the boil rupture
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I have seen a man pierced or wounded by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there were emissions and windings; I treated it according to what I knew, and did not stop subliming until it healed, and the ligaments adhered.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I see it sutured, I doubted that the patient had trouble in his stomach; and there was no problem, but he improved in better condition, and ate and drank; and any experienced person said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied up in such a way: take strong farts, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the fart has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips, so that it stretches its mouth open; and then strike the head, and hold it so that it cannot undo itself, then put another fart after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the head of the intestine becomes inflamed, it causes no harm to the patient, and the intestine can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, as follows: take the end of this intestinal thread that is sharpened, then tie it to the head of a linen thread twisted in a similar manner, then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine, and draw the stitches along the wound; and this method of suturing is not harmful except by faith and hope. If the injury is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the greater intestines, there is no trick or healthiness, except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or...
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals and forms a swelling, is universally called "fistula," and likewise when it bursts and empties.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And fistula is, according to the truth, a hard and white nodule, where there is no pain felt, and it swells like the feather of a bird; sometimes it clears up with a clear discharge, and at other times it becomes thick; sometimes it is small, and at other times it is quite large; I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed and has no flesh, is not healed except by one of the nine causes: that is to say, due to the small amount of blood or body fluid; or because of its bad quality; or because there is hard matter within, under the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much discharge; or the wound is deep, and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because corruption is a form of pestilence; or because the digestion in that region is slow, and healing is slow and weak, and it recedes naturally; or there are veins or bones: I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the medicines for treatment in the section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I shall tell you the cure for a fistula made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or at the anus, or intestines, or bladder, or one of the ribs, or the spine on the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it occurs in the principle member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance for them; and if any fistula does not come up to the level I have said, and you have confidence in its cure, and you observe it, take a tent of wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, use it; and if the fistula is twisted, look for a fine tent of yarn, because yarn bends with twists; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot find it with tents, cauterize it through one of the holes, because moisture goes from one hole to another, and cleanses it; then clean it as well as you can, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is filled up, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it is; and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foreign matter and corrupt charcoal inside; and then cure it until it heals, and if the fistula is well penetrated from a straight direction, then cut through it entirely, as much as you can, then put wet tents soaked in medicine on it, and push them up to the end of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter that remains inside; and then put ointments made with healthy charcoal on it, until it heals; and if it does not heal by this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If neither vein nor artery presses or major limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all corruption is removed, then treat with charms as necessary until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, drain pus as before, know that you are not yet at the fountain: expose and scrape as deep as possible, remove all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the corruption is too deep that you cannot reach it; and if there is only a little corrupted bone, and you can extract it with pliers, remove it with the appropriate tool for this purpose, and if there are many bones, remove all of them, do not leave any; and if moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, strike and subdue moisture and char, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove [the affected part] within an hour, put on the wound something stimulating decay, and leave it until the flesh surrounds the bones, and then the bones will be removed more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of a leg or thigh, press the corruption only until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part corrupted, and comes to the marrow of the bone; it must be excised and covered up to the corruption, and then cured until it heals; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so you can take an example and help with your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something inside his body that caused matter to come to the leg, and he had a large abscess, and there was no cause for it to open; but they mistakenly opened the abscesses many times due to their folly, and much matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and much moisture came from the body; and many people tried to cure him for two years, and there was no skilled hand among them until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines they were using, and what flowed out through the sores at great intervals; and the young man's body became red, and he had a citrus-like color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I stitched a tent in one of the wounds, and then searched all the wounds, and found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I then hurried and cut in one of the wounds as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the rot came to the bone within; what appeared to me was the rotten bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except that which I left; and for a long time I began to treat the wound with medicinal salves, but could not heal it; and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the rot continuing in the bone, and I removed it, and then left it, and intended to set the bone; but I could not do so more than I cut around a palm of the bone, and exposed it completely to the air, then set it with medicines; and it healed quickly and was soon mended, and no further work needed to be done except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and out of fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Because of the blood evacuation, it often heals entirely, and a hard cyst grows in the place of the bone, and it has a good disposition and no harm or contrary effect at all, neither at the side nor at coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated like this: take a thread, and tie it to the end of the open bone, and command someone to stretch it up; then place another larger thread on top of the cyst that is under the bone, and tie it so that you pull out the corrupt cyst from below, and uncover the cyst in the place where you want to be, so that it does not irritate the cyst; place a splint or a stick underneath the bone to cover the corrupt cyst; and it must be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and it must be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, cover the flesh entirely; then place fire underneath, and then be from one part to another the corruption, and let the iron [or instrument for correction] be along the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, strike the corrupted joint, and be the bone or it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other opening but to cover [it]; and if the corruption is at the tip of the hand or foot, it is a very difficult thing, but still you must investigate the corruption, how it opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not harm the vein or the nerve; and know that the cutting tool and the iron for covering bones are many, according to the type of bone and the appearance of the wound, and its thickness and subtlety, and its size and smallness, and hardness; and therefore it is necessary to adapt the instrument to each type of work; and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the understanding of this art, and the testimony of the characteristics of diseases; thus consider the tool you need according to what it should be.
dou feu	hot fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may rot internally or externally; and when you have medicine to cure the corruption of that member, but it does not help, then you must cover the affected limb up to where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death by this or by a greater evil, which is the loss of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black as if burned by fire, and afterward they become darker, because the corruption spreads from one member to another and takes over the whole body; hasten to cover it, and if it is due to the sting of certain venomous animals like sea scorpion and viper and similar, cover the head of the affected limb and do not give them room to reach up to your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it comes up to the hand, strike at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, strike at the side; and if it passes the side, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue; and thus do as when the corrosion comes or falls: if it comes at the first joint, then strike after the next joint; and if it comes or falls, strike the entire bone; and if it goes into the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means of help for the patient but to let him die; and the method of striking or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister on the lower ligament, and another minister on the upper ligament, and you cut the flesh between the two ligaments with a thin spatula, until the bone is exposed; then strike or sew, and place a piece of linen cloth on each side so that the sewing does not touch the healthy part, and cause the patient further injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. And when blood flow occurs while you operate, cauterize the area immediately, or apply certain powders that restrict bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb with a suitable bandage and cure it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my town: he had a black spot that looked like a burn by fire, and that corrosion first appeared on his foot, consuming all of the foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he cut off the foot, and it healed; and a long time later the corrosion returned to his hand or fingers, and it came to me, and I applied reactive substances after purification of the body, but the corrosion could not be stopped; and he asked that I amputate his hand, but I refused because I had hope of healing the matter; and I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die, for the vitality of man was weak; and he lost all hope, returned to his earth, and cut off his own hand, and it healed; and I have not heard this story except because such things are done when necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Sometimes an abscess appears in a charred place and remains so long that it forms a large swelling; and then it becomes red and pierces through, and the swelling jumps out, leaving the place open as a wound does, just like a vassal's; and the skin that is on top is as thin as fine linen, and it will not penetrate to the bone or the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", not "fistule"; but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone completely, it is called "fistule"; and the skin should be cut all around, just like one cuts fine linen; and it does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. And if the skin hardens [and] corruption is not complete, and the skin is swollen with pus, treat it thus: look to see if the breasts are large and the boil that is within them is full of foul smell, then clisterize with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take asafetida, oil, pitch, equally, and cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; and then take according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and clisterize the breast, and press out the pus; leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it while straining; do this often, until the breast is cleansed and the pus is gone; and at times clisterize with water of ashes, when the Egyptian medicine is not present, and take ashes from a vine stick, pour water over it, then strain it, and clisterize until you know that the breast is clean; and if the patient cannot endure it, or the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then clisterize with water and honey or mead, where the honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the pus harden; when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is cleaned, then clisterize with whatever makes it produce charcoal in it, and take emplastrum definitive, and mix it with oil of roses and vinegar; or clisterize with various medicines and ointments, of which I have told the properties or the treatment of the ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the clistering stick cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with a knife, and apply an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, so that it can be opened; and if the wound is too large, make it smaller, but only enough for the hand or clistering stick to enter, and if the boil is above, press down on it or press lower.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bowels are fully dilated, do not let anything enter char; and if you cannot cover the belly with cloth as you see, arrange it in such a way that the bowels move downwards as much as possible, for when the bowels are fully dilated, do not let anything enter char and if you cannot cover the belly with cloth as you see, arrange it in this manner: the bowels move lightly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bowel; take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and place them on a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then press firmly towards the wound opening which is wider than the first, then apply ointment gently on the other cloth according to the size of the wound opening, and place it on the wound opening to align the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once; and the one who is on the wound opening removes it often to dislocate the bowel, and knows what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or pus or gas or undigested; and be careful if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that rises on the wound opening, know that the bowels have healed and are approaching health; then release it in the morning or the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts swell improperly after many days, know that the breasts do not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisonous worms attack after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 For those who delay healing of flesh in their wounds, and for those who do the opposite; and if they consume food indigestibly after many days, know that the breast will not heal; and if the breast is slow to heal, and has become swollen, apply drying medicines with dry substance and wet virtue, such as linseed oil, because it contains a great part of vitriol, which is the last resort; use linseed oil, mix it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine as its substance; then cook it and use it; and if linseed oil is not present, take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, powder them on the honey when it is over the fire; then spread the plaster on the breast, and sometimes administer an astrologer's long root, which is also like flour and centaur; and use simple or compound herbs: grind them, make a powder, and put it on the honey I have said, and use it; and if the wound is deep and not cured by this cure, then know that corruption has spread throughout, and makes an impression in the bone or hard parts or ligaments; treat with fistula cure as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance arises in other places; and when it swells and care is not taken, if the abscess grows, it runs and spreads until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may grow entirely; and the corrosion comes up to the bone, causing pain that smells bad, and the joints become wide, and the color becomes putrid.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, then you must cut off all the excess that remains from the nail, followed by cauterizing the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cauteries are very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; and if the nail grows into the flesh, starts to swell, and bleed, it is necessary that you place the heated iron beneath the nail so as not to burn the skin, push up the nail slightly, strike gently and lightly on the root of the nail, and apply hot and corrosive medicines above it in order to remove all; then let it heal until it is sound.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 If the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and draw it out, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; if you see that it needs to be corroded, do so as before said, then let it heal until it is sound; and if it is wounded and painful, you must first make it healthy; then cut the nail with a sharp chisel diagonally above, but watch that the cutting does not reach the skin beneath the nail because the patient would feel too much pain; if this happens, place something to relieve it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 One should cauterize the tumor that arises in some people's hands accidentally, and sometimes it has flesh or bone, or even a nail; and one of them is born on the root of the joint or in any of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The tumor that arises in the finger does not move, but the one that arises at the joint of the finger may move; the size of the fleshly tumor is small, in this manner: cut it off at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; cover it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For the tumor that arises or should be in the last finger, it is necessary to first cut off the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate cautery, and treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Fractures come together in the joints due to birth, injury, burns, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If you have to cauter that sore, it should heal according to its natural shapes; then put between two tent or cloths moistened in rose oil so they do not stick; or you put between two pieces of subtle plank until the wound is healed as required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If one of his hands comes with the palm towards the joint, you strike that joint as needed.
des vils	 of villains (in this context, "villain" is a term used to refer to common people or peasants)
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are the large veins swollen with excessive melancholic fluid that appear in various parts of the body; and it happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer purges of bile on occasion, and then heal with the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is according to two ways: one is that you cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you tie up the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The size of the incision is as follows: first, heat the leg with very hot water, until the flesh becomes soft, then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the kneecap; then make a large cut in the vein, either at I or II or III, and remove black blood up to your hand, as much blood as the strength of the patient can endure; then tie it, and order him to bind with food that turns the urine dark; start the evacuation and healing again when the veins are full, and this helps the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The dressing of the wound is as follows: if there is much hair on the patient's leg, shave it, then place him in water or heat his leg with fire and apply hot water, until the flesh turns red and the veins swell; if you don't have water, heat the leg with fire. Then make an incision along the long side of the thigh towards the knee or below the calf; open the skin around the vein on both sides, revealing it as soon as it is felt; it will appear red and black, and when it appears, it looks like a white cord; then push the fat down, allowing it to swell under the skin, and then lightly close the incision, then make another incision at a different place, 3 inches away from the first one or more if necessary; then open the skin over the vein again, revealing it as before, then remove the blood, as you have done before, and repeat the incision at another spot, as you did before; then make another cut, or multiple cuts if needed, until all the blood is removed, then close it; if you cannot remove or lift the blood, insert a thick double-threaded needle into it and pull it, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; be careful not to let it burst, as it cannot be drawn or lifted if it does, and this harms the patient; when you have treated it all, place linen dampened in wine and oil on the wound, and nurse it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, you should cut it open forcefully, but do not cover it up; pull it out as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The shape of the iron used to strike the face is curved, but it does not cut through; instead it should be used to open a vein. It is thick and large because if it were thin, it would pierce the skin, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein (or artery)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is located in the legs, in hot areas where no grass or trees grow, and on dry ground; it may also occur elsewhere, but this happens due to a worm that arises from under the skin, as it comes within the body like a serpent and penetrates between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the joint changes and the vein begins to forcefully issue forth, just as the root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the joint opens, you must cover it with a piece of wood about 7 to 12 inches long, and sew it, and leave the wood on the leg, and each time it starts to swell out, you should re-cover it with the wood and sew it; if it is too long, cut off part of it and cover the remaining, and do not sew near its root, as long as it is completely issued; for if you sew it, it returns into the flesh, bringing abscess and pus or poison and a bad disease. Therefore, it must be treated little by little until it reaches the neck, and nothing remains in the body. Sometimes this vein, when it is treated, can reach 5 or 10 inches long, and once I had a man who had one that was 10 inches long. When you cut it open, push a plaster or a plug into it, and pierce it all the way through, so that everything comes out of it. The matter inside should be emptied, and medicines for pus should be applied to it daily, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And at times this vein is opened wide, especially when it gapes in the joint of the foot or hand, and much bleeding ensues, causing it to spurt; then heal it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 from worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called in our land "beef disease," because it often occurs with cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body expanding and contracting, and one can feel it move from member to member until it reaches the skin or leaves, and jumps away; and it causes intestinal poisoning of certain humors, such as worms, serpents, larvae, or roundworms in the stomach; and doubt is cast on its malice, for when it travels through the body, and it rises to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it to be treated and drawn, one cannot force it but when it goes; therefore, you must first tie the limb above and below with a strong ligament tightly, then strike it and draw it out, and if its head enters fully into the flesh, and you do not feel it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does, is that it burns oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold under it a bellows shaped cork, then strike it and draw it out; and you must use the patient with purifying of the body medicines soluble for bad humors, and prevent him from eating sour foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 The pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called "vakirir" in our land and it is a pain that moves from one member to another; and I have seen this as I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman and found her arm swollen, and shortly after saw a small boil in the armpit; then I felt it rise like a worm towards the shoulder much more quickly than anything else, just as silver cuts one thing from another; the pain departed from that place and pierced the shoulder, then a little later ran throughout the body, so she came to the other arm; then she said that it returned around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 In addition, I wanted many who were suffering pain to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in a woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins open, and because of this appeared that constrained windiness; and they do not understand according to this reason those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you wish to cure this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, press it both above and below quickly, then strike on it so that the constrained windiness goes from the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it in your eyes, cure it with those who expel windiness, such as fetid pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 Arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The diversity of them [arrows] is that there are some with large points and small, smooth and solid; and some with two tips, and those with tongues, and those with spikes; and the one that falls in any member falls according to two ways: either in a principal member, like brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it falls in any part of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears: if it is necessary to extract this arrow, for death comes in many ways after; and when this ill sign does not appear at all, and the arrow is not fully embedded, pull it out and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces it, and the swelling that is on top of the brain, is similar to scotomia (loss of vision), sagitta (arrow wound), esverted eye, reddening in the eyes, inflammation and redness of tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes without swelling in the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it may lose speech and voice; and it jumps from a wound with white moisture resembling pus, and also as boiling of char; and if this sign appears to you, refrain from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it strikes or pierces is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it had been thrust into a hard object, not empty; and perhaps the arrow swells like a pustule, with black blood coming out, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: therefore there should be no doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow that has pierced the flesh is without bubbles jumping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and seeks for the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the bed of hay, it is buried in the ribs; and it emits a great groan and great pain and breaths heavily; and all the members of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or food remains stuck in the wound, by chance anything from undigested meat may jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach, and something from the undigested intestines jumps out of the wound, there is no hope for the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow strikes the bladder and urine jumps out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members such as the face and neck, shoulder and back, chest and arms, spine of the back, pelvis and legs, and similar limbs are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason you should do something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to a man that an arrow fell or pierced into the root of his nose: I pulled it out from another side under the fat of the ear, and it was found senseless.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pulled out an arrow that fell into the grease of the oil under the paper, and the arrow was curved, and could not be reached but the tip towards the foot, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all iron-headed ears; the player was senseless, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pulled out an Arabic arrow from a Christian's throat, and the arrow had iron ears; I sharpened the points, and carefully pulled it out, and the Christian was senseless.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And he drew an arrow from the man who was struck or wounded, and thought that he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his position did not change at all; I cut above the arrow, and made it come out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if you want to treat a man who has an arrow lodged in his chest or back, and the wound is closed over it; if the arrow remains inside him without moving his natural positions, and no harm is found in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And you want to treat another man who has an arrow in his face, and the wound is closed over it; and he suffers great pain for a long time; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And draw out an arrow from the body of the prince, the king who was struck in the neck, and he was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely lodged. I was called to the treatment after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I probed it with a thin probe and did not feel anything; but he felt sharpness and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I placed a plaster attractive and digestive on the spot because the wound did not swell; and the arrowhead appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I kept the plaster on for many days, and healed the wound directly, and the patient remained for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his neck; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I put the wound medicine corrosive on for many days until it opened, and then I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which stuck in place; next, I cauterized the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow became visible; and the wound healed well within four months, and then it broke open again where I had nailed the pliers, and the flesh on either side could not close; therefore, I did not stop refining and devising ways to extract the arrows, until I made the pliers properly fitted for this purpose, as will be described at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the mirrors judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I will restore it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I told you the quality of extracting some arrows, but I do not say all of it, for books cannot entirely grasp it; but wise masters understand well a little thing and concerning that which is present and failing, they discover nine works, and new tools, in the diminishment of foreign things which happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows do not pierce the members where they are inserted except in two ways: either by the side through which they enter, or from another part; and that which springs forth through the side where it enters is an arrow entering into the fleshy parts, and sometimes springs out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh is torn around, and align the joint; and in the same way, if it is pierced into the bone and cannot come out, leave it for a few days and move it every day; then it will jump, and if it does not jump, pierce all around with a very sharp instrument, until the muscles around are loosened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrow is pierced into the head's bone and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the incidents I mentioned earlier occur: do not pull it out at all, but let it remain evenly for a few days, because if the arrow reaches such a place, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not embedded beyond the bone only and does not reach deeply, and the patient remains ill for some days with bad accidents, then you should try to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be extracted, administer a plaster around it, as I told you earlier; then heal the wound when it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is embedded deep within the body and cannot be seen, you should search for it thoroughly; if you feel it, draw it out with any suitable tool; if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, make an incision as large as necessary; draw the arrow and break off the ears on it if there are any, then grind away the part of the shaft that is embedded in the flesh as much as you can, then bend or break the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow when pulling it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, press the arrowhead against the bones around it, then pull it out, as extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood obstructs [the procedure], bring to mind what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve or vein, and use a device as you can safely draw out the arrowhead, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do so, position him according to what the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrowhead coming from elsewhere, if it penetrates anything, or the skin is inflamed around it as one can see or sense clearly; cut through it then, until the pincers can grasp it, and then pull it out; if it pops out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round as much as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, leave it still and then continue the extraction as long as it comes forth; and if it is of an arrow, push it all in; and if it is broken, you should administer grease to make it slippery, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then push harder, and when the arrow is slipped in, push the instrument in pointedly for easier extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the poison is, as you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrow falls into the chest or abdomen or bladder or side and is close, and you can cover it, do so; but beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and sew up the wound if needed, and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the growing hair at its tip is like a bird's feather, to guide the arrowhead. [Here, "li forme dou boutant cheveit" can be understood as "the shape of growing hair tips", and "com li penne d’un oisel" means "like a bird's feather".]
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the forceps (tongue-like instrument) for insertion and removal is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	openings of the body's common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 From the veins from which one recovers are thirty-one, of which the head is sixteen, namely: two veins that are after the ears, called "the two 'herbech'"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible; and the two veins that are in the two eyes, called "aspirers"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two veins that are at the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, which are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly healed are five in each arm: one is called the cephalic, and it is situated on the left side of the chest and the common people call it "vein of the head"; the middle one is called "fistula", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; the basilic vein is on the right side of the chest and the common people call it "ventricle vein", and it is above the elbow, and it is the one that opens manifestly near the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The cubital is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and there are two of them; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is under the wrist of the left side of the chest, and the second saphenous which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nesse" that is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The first hairs of the arteries located behind the ears assist with old-time catharsis and emigration; and the nature of these hairs, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head, and scrub the place where the arteries are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw so that both arteries appear behind the ears on their dependent places from the head; hold them there until you feel the pulse beneath your hand; then take the lancet, and push it through the artery up to the bone, then pull your whole hand along the entire artery, piercing and the skin and the artery well two times through; and make blood flow until you see; then tie and hold it until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The first artery in the two temples is useful to migraine, sciatica, and optometry which are common ailments, and to cure eye pain; the quality of the artery is as I have said: when the patient turns his neck so that both veins appear openly; you feel a pulsation beneath your thumb, then apply pressure on it; raise the incision above your thumbnail towards your index finger, insert the lancet, raise the vein, and cut it, as you have done in other veins, and collect blood according to your need; then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; form a bandage and leave it until it is healed; we have spoken about its treatment and extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for old facial diseases that have migrated and reddened; and their qualities are such that the patient turns his neck while twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Place the point on the vein and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to its quantity that you see; then release the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed and never perform this operation with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Furthermore, the flames should not be too sharp, and it is better to proceed obliquely because the bone is close, and there is danger of breaking the flame when it is narrow.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The vein of the two eyes located in the tear ducts helps in the treatment of inflammation, redness, swelling, and facial diseases; their qualities are such that the patient turns his neck while twisting with any restraint, as previously mentioned; then heal it, and make the incision through the vein a short distance from the flame but wide enough, for there is no pain.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a tourniquet of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with linen, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The following of the vein in the nose is beneficial for ague, scrofula, and sicknesses of the face, such as migraines and redness that come from the face, and especially when it is old; and the qualities of the vein are that the patient stretches his neck, then his nose to your left hand, takes subtle flame long, and pierces it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in whom, and the wound will begin to heal soon; do not go too deep, and make the bleeding stop according to your necessity, then let it rest for a night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The saline of the two tendons helps in the straightening of the ankle, at the beginning of swelling, and in many diseases, and pus formation, and corrosion, and herpes, and abscesses; and the qualities of the saline are such that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and if the master is standing above the patient's head, and the patient lies on the chair, then open the vein along its length slightly widely, then draw the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then do the same in another vein, then untie the ligament, and gently tighten all the veins so that the patient does not strain; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the healing of the shoulders
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The saliva from the veins of the lips above helps to clot in the mouth and contributes to the corruption of gums, fissures in lips, and tooth and surrounding issues.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of healing are to make the patient sit before you, hold their neck as I have said; then turn the shoulder, and look at both veins, one is on the right shoulder and the other on the left, and they can be recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the small veins around them: strike one and the other, and if you do not know which one it is, or if you are in doubt, strike the largest of each pair, and do the same for the upper and lower ones, as it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The healing of the veins beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic healing, and it is in the straining of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of healing are that the patient should sit between your hands before the sun, lift the tongue, and look beneath on each side for a black vein: heal one and the other, but do not go too deep, as below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins from which one commonly heals are healed according to two methods: either by pricking with a lance that burns widely, or with olive oil fine as you know it, and is called "anesil"; and they are large and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirrhine is very famous, and it is wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 It is necessary to open hairless veins that contain thick blood and are troubled; this is the form of oil-burning.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is pointed more precisely, and is for thinning the subtle veins where there is fine yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, neck, chest, and belly; it is necessary for the patient to heal completely, and he must be cauterized from the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 If the artery is touched and bleeding occurs, it should be stopped as I have said; but the flame should not be pricked, but rather cut like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 If the basilica does not open clearly, you should force it to open and change another one, or seek any other opening in its place, such as the vein at the elbow; it opens clearly; and when touching the flame, use a lancet as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 If you want to find the location of the vein, you must also extend the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot for making the incision, bind the arm tightly, and burn the vein with a lancet; be careful not to wound the artery when you see the vein inflated because it is an artery - avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it rise high as a child's urine, and the patient is red and subtle, know that this is not from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger long on it, then remove your finger when the patient does not bleed anymore; leave the arm in this state, and do not move it by the patient; be afraid, and do not move it until it becomes healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not cauterized and it starts to bleed, and there is no medicine present, then seize the artery if it opens up, as it can be stopped by compressing it; stop the bleeding of the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 Take a piece of fustic bark, cut it and take one half and lay it on top until the next day; if it does not bleed, that is good; if not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood flow; but the stopping of the bleeding should not be overdone in many ways due to the smallness of the wound and the tension of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The first vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins as we have said; therefore, the master must press for the nerve that is below, and if it bleeds too much when pierced and he finds the nerve, it swells and the patient feels pain and may not heal; and this nerve opens up often, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the instrument; pull away the nerve as far as your strength allows.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make an incision along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The first vein of the head helps to drain blood from the head and the eyes; it needs to be cauterized by olive oil or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Moreover, it is necessary to seek the lighter joint, and not to worry if it needs to be done the first time, and you may start again; and sometimes the joints swell in some people, when it should be done for the first time, but do not worry.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not performed unless to maintain health and avoid future illnesses; and it should be done in one of the three veins: cephalic, femoral, or basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first day or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The healing administered for diseases has no set hour determined, but when there is need of day or night, at all hours and in every tense; and it is not appropriate to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor women bearing fruit except during the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	The patient who have passed sixty years, should not heal themselves.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 And when anyone wishes to be healed, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that their intestines are cleansed with a gentle enema, if they have retained much wind, so that the veins do not carry excess waste to the main organs; nor should one heal him who is excessively salted with food, or drunk, until he is sober, nor those who are dropsical; and if healing is done after a colonic affliction, vomiting, abdominal disorder, multiple urination at women, and labor, watchfulness, and fasting, and those suffering from poison or injury to the body; then refine the humors, if he is not fat, by food and drink and medicines, if you have the power; then immerse in water, unless anything prevents it, to thin the blood, and heal from the vein on the side of the third finger, as we have said; and keep him on that day from labor, pain, lust, and similar things; and be cheerful and joyful, and let the healer be higher than the one being healed, and rub his arm two or three times, then gently pull out the thread above, for when it is too tight or thin, it cannot heal without; then rub the site with the hand until the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the healer's fingers with a spoonful of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand under that vein below the site where you wish to heal, so that the vein does not flee and fail when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that resemble cords in a sieve, and there are some that are filled with pus, so that when you put the fire on them, they shrink from the flame and cannot open the vein, and it is thus with these; if the vein is opened, the wound is too narrow, therefore the sewer must be aware of such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; but if not, start again a little below or above that place where it is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the limb swells and the patient fears, let it rest for a day or two and do not tie the arm; perhaps there will come pus; do not enter the bath, then resume the sewer if he wishes; and if the wound is small or narrow, open it gently with a subtle knife and doubt if it does not appear that there will be much blood; firmly apply the fire to the wound itself immediately; and open it a little hastily, so that the limb swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the place swollen, do not start draining it immediately, but put a little bit of oil on it, for it lightens the body with blood and is turned into this liquid by the oil; and administer the oil in every drainage when you drain the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this also works for scabs and boils, when it is placed on the place; if it becomes too thick, it dissolves and separates when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens when the opening of the vein is small, hasten, and put on the place a wet sponge in hot vinegar and oil, and press it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains in its place after several days without turning black or green, it will not hurt; and if you see, apply anything of aloes or myrrh, mixed with cumin, camphor, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance occur in the church's sanctuary: place your hand on it then, and if you find it soft under the pressure of your hand, this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then do not place anything above what has been said, for in court without the artery; but make one dry plaster to harden it, then treat with other treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to the amount of its power and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; and if you see it large, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it is necessary for one who is wounded and hollowed out, and needs the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it must be drained little by little, and it should be drained obliquely, not punctured; and this method of draining is safe from the displacement of blood and the compression of nerves, and it is more effective than draining long rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For the body that requires draining, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in grape juice; if it is scalded, drain blood three or four times. And for one of cold complexion, fast before draining with soft bread in syrup mixed, or syrup of aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and a pleasant-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if it hurts at the incision after a large flow of blood, then it is required that you apply crushed charcoal, fragrant subtle syrup, and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter of bleeding, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If one wants to burst open his arm or bleed elsewhere when weakened by repeated bleeding, it should be done little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If one wishes to burst open his arm after the first bleeding and has a strong heart, he should wait 6 hours following the first bleeding or the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	If one wishes to bleed elsewhere, it should be done on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body which is already heated and causes fever; it is necessary to draw out a large amount, and to open the incision as wide as possible until it stops bleeding; then you must follow all the conditions of the incision, and place your hand on top of the pulses when it stops bleeding, so that death does not come in its place, and this happens many times when the lancer is negligent; and it is not necessary to dislocate the arm and draw blood a second time, and the incision is closed, but you press firmly; nor if it is curved, extend the arm quickly, because that would be bad; rather let it stop bleeding a second time; or place the point of the flame at the wound until the coagulated blood from the vein flows out, and place a piece of fresh linen on top, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is open, do not restrain it but let it be until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place where it was drawn before, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is connected to the vein of the head because they are composed of the same material.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of the wound is that the patient pushes their hand into boiling hot water, until the flesh becomes red; then it should be tied slightly, so the vein appears clearly; then press gently along the vein, neither wide nor long; and let it be pierced widely, and let the wound be sewn close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand back into boiling hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water as much as you have; and if it is in the summer, do not push the hand back into boiling hot water again, because it causes more harm in the summer than in winter; and the wound of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The healing of the thumb of the right hand is beneficial for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done: strap the hand, immerse it in hot water until the vein swells, if possible to see; and if the thumb is sore, and you cover it completely with hot water, it won't cause any harm; do not push too deep, for the nerves are exposed under the skin all around, then put the hand back into hot water, provided that the wound is not frozen over and cannot heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood as needed, put oil and linen on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purgation of the left hand's skin is beneficial for the disease of the mice, and do as I told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The healing of the saphena (long vein in the inner lower leg) is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the stomach, retention of fluids, rheumatism, and old legs and knees, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of his wound is that the patient steps on hot water and rubs it over the vein until it burns, and ties above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many rain-like lines; therefore open the largest line or one near the ankle, which is more effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	If you close it above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and close it through as in cutting; and let the flames be still.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the wound does not heal, immerse the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the wound needs to be treated the first time, start the second one above a little, because the skin is salty; do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the sole of the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and lancing it relieves the pain of the heel when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the quality of his wound is that the patient immerses himself in water and twists above the ankle four feet, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, treat it in every way you can, and by crossing over it; and it is more effective to cover it, because the skin is tough and responds poorly to hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't correct it, no remedy will open or close the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of nerves; and make as much incision as you see fit, and then untie the ligament, and put cotton on it and press; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 wounds caused by the cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blisters (of ventouse) are made of horns, or hog's bristles, or glass; and ventosation is done according to two methods: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This cupping, which is done by cutting or without fire, has two methods: one that affects the whole body, or with fire; and cupping that is made by cutting and bloodletting is performed in 14 leagues of the body, so that one is completely on the head (the top); and others are in the neck; and others in the two sides of the neck; and cupping under the chin; and cupping under the shoulders; and cupping over the ankles; and cupping in the arms; and cupping in the legs; and cupping in the wrists; and cupping is not used for bloodletting, but only for minor veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it should not be administered at all, neither by fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from swelling, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if due to necessity or custom it is required to use cupping, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and during any time; for there are those who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head; and those who find themselves full and red in their face, head, neck, and dark under the eyes; and those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, their tongue has swollen and bleed; and those who think, see black spots and hallucinate, and dream and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially during the month, we order to have them bled after 4 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The suction of the nose helps with headaches ... that come under the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body; and this cupping is in place of cephalic bleeding, and it should not be used on those who have a cold constitution or are constipated, as it does great harm to them; and therefore those with head colds or diseases should not use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And if one heals often from it, they become numb, and therefore, the ventosation must be placed a little lower due to the fear of numbness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is in the position of the spine and basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial for compression of the pains, and for splitting of the channel of the opening, and all of these; and it must be pressed gently, because if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction or pain in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosation in the costal part of the neck is beneficial for pains in the head, and otalgia and emigraine, and for strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the position of the spine of the basilica; and you should command the patient to press gently with his hand, not to crush the artery, and no bleeding should come.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Wind-tunnels under the chin are useful for mouth diseases, tooth decay, and similar mouth illnesses; they are in the position of the sinuses of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Wind-tunnels in the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the armpits are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; instruct the lord not to press too deeply, for the flesh is naked there and knows nerves and arteries beneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventosation on the buttocks is worth as much as the emorroid operations at their foundation, and for diseases below, and it must be large and made of horsehair, which needs to be drawn well, and if it were too thin, it would break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings of the legs open widely because they attract blood from all over the body, and they are similar to ancient pains in the sides, hips, and bladder, and they reduce the flow of fluids; they are located at the junctions of the shins and ankles, and they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus into various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to treat the swelling is that you first evacuate it and immediately apply a warm substance, press it quickly, move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the redness and swelling subside, and the redness of the blood appears; then bandage it, and take care in the position of the body, because there are some who have hard flesh and clear pores: it is necessary to wound only once, and it is necessary to make wide incisions, but not too deep; and evacuate gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to make two incisions: the first one to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the bone is very thick, it must be struck three times; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 If we want much blood, let us frequently draw it; if the flesh is thick, press deeply, and set a limit so that the veins are pierced suddenly; it is necessary for those with thick skin and hard who have narrow pores, to anoint the leeks of the armpits with stimulating and dissolving oil: if in summer, use violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; if in winter, use oil of parsley, lilies, chamomile, or other similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil or balsam oil, anise oil, and any similar oil.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the patient whose wound you are treating has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after the lancing with rose water, or cold water, or vinegar water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or another similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ashes or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with excessive fluids rise from old wine or sour milk, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar; and no one should be lanced before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after the lancing, and it is necessary that he urinate, when he should be lanced and when he has been lanced.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And keep in mind that the person who is recovering is colicky and too acute and inflamed; therefore, it is necessary for him to take cold things, such as raw apples, endives, lettuces, and similar foods; and eat little, and meat of chicken, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 If the person has a cold complexion, he should take honey syrup, fragrant wine moderately old, and eat little, and eat peas, and finely chopped birds and sparrows; on the day when he vomits, he should drink more than eat; it is necessary to give some men some triacetum or muscatel before or after the vomiting, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs; and let the inflamed ones be slightly cooled, but he who is hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The ventouses that are placed to wound are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, gout, belly and side, as these members cannot bear being wounded elsewhere, and this is done only to draw blood from one member into another, for example, on nipples when a woman is nursing; to remove viscosity from the member, as we do with a ventouse on the abdomen or side to reduce it; and to alleviate pain, where there is obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive power accidentally the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place; and in this way it operates when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness, and these ventouses are administered empty for suctioning only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, such as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a manner one fills the ventouse with hot saline solution or with hot water where herbs such as convulvulus have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the blister to be treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should be two fingers and a half palm's width apart, and have a hole of the size of a small nail, like pushing an awl, and made of iron, soft beforehand so as not to prick the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle, there should be a rod of a span in length, either of iron or steel, for placing a splint, and they should be big and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for children's boils are different from old people's, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this boil splint should be placed on the limb: take a linen or wax strip and place it across the rod within the boil, so that the light is at the bottom of the boil to prevent burning the patient; then place the splint on the limb, and the fingers should be above the hole as we have said, so that when one looks, if steam comes out, the boil can be removed; and take a linen strip again as before, and apply it frequently, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the bladder, which is administered when there is pleurisy disease, it has no worm nor puncture, and it is not administered except when it is full of liquid, and it is placed on the member only; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Snaives are not administered except in members where bladders cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in naked skin areas, such as the palms or soles, and others of this kind; and the quality of the user is that when you find snaives that are in clear, sweet, net liquid, take them; put them in a sweet, clear container until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies; then let it be sanitized with wine and bladder, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the snaives on it; and when they are full and warm, if it is a place where a bladder can be placed, put the bladder there, for this works very well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If it is not so, lift the shoulder blade slightly, then more strongly, very well, and press on it; if the shoulders are still too close to the body after the ribs, moisten a linen cloth with cold water, place it, until the ribs are dry; if the ribs multiply, place broken vitriol or salve, or similar things, until they are dry; or you place half-peeled beans on the shoulder blade and leave them until they harden onto the shoulder blade, it will be healed now; and if you have more need of this, take other ribs.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 If the ribs do not want to be taken, rub the shoulder blade with fresh blood or insert an awl until the ribs come out, then place them, and as soon as they feel blood, they will harden; when you see that they are dislocated, sprinkle some powder of aloe and soap, or charcoal on it, and it will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Learn, dear child, that the foolish man should abandon this chapter, for he will never see any of the ancient books, nor read any letters from them; and because of this, science is alienated in our land, for I have never found good one; and I do not know anything more, except by the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book the number of words and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 When fracture, dislocation, twisting or sprain comes to anyone, you should hurry to heal the patient on both sides, if nothing prevents it, such as frailty of body, weakness, or old age; or if the time is not very hot, or too cold; and you should eat cool foods, that is to say cold meats, and meat of eye and shin, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not eat too many foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess being hot, or spreading matter to the member; if the patient returns to his first good government as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause thick mucus, such as cooked wheat in water and broth, meat, heads, feet, beef, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For thick nourishment strengthens and heals the broken bones more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well regained nor joined according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, neither those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, set the large tenons on the fractured bone which fits and joins the limb together, until it is enforced as before; and do not apply any pressure to the joint, and therefore feed it with large foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is other than the break of the foot, or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the joint, and another growing sharper, like the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a break with a wound, then it is a break with a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each one has its tool and instrument appropriate for restoration, according to what memory comes in its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the joint is twisted and opened wide, and pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no breakage; but it may have twisting, or fissuring, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move the hand yourself, but put on the medicines that come after this, and then gently tighten it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the breaks that go to the elbow, and are the two parts disjointed, they should now be put back in alignment equally, otherwise abscesses may grow there; and if abscesses grow there, let it rest for a day until the abscess is soothed; then place it equal to the arm that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of one where it has been broken into pieces; then tighten as needed.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 If the bone is broken into pieces, it should be set with two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or in your hand it is a small member, or two cords, or one cord and in your hand; then place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are dislocated, you restore them using all means necessary, ensuring not to cause injury or pain to the patient. Align the two joints of the bone well according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it seems not well to you: straighten it properly, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscess heat and contraction to the member, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is set, correctly bind the patient so that he does not move, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and be careful that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 If it feels no pain, then the limb is not set, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain; be careful that it is straightened, so that twisting does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs can be of various kinds, large or small, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For small members such as fingers and thumbs: it is necessary to wrap them with soft and thin linen cloths; for larger ones such as hands and legs: it is necessary to wrap with a wide and stiff rope, because the large ropes embrace the whole large limb equally, and they keep it straight without any twist; then wrap around light bandages, three or four times according to the member, and hold tight one part of the rope with your hand; then go above the fracture and tighten less than the fracture, pull away slightly from the fracture; and soften the rope little by little until you take a large piece of healthy flesh; then take another rope, and twist it around the other way over the broken limb; then return to the lower part of the fracture, and tighten moderately, neither too tightly nor loosely as we have said in the first rule above; then put between the ropes soft bandages until they are all even; then bind everything together with tape, and then make well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is an inflammation or abscess, place a soothing substance for the abscess that is hot over it, and let the inflammation be for certain days; then press on your elbows, and they should be half the thickness of a large cane carefully sawn, or a rod used to make fissures, or palm reeds, and they should be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But the elbows that one places over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and they should also be as long as the member is small or large; then press on the elbows in the same way as you did at the first instruction, then tie a cord above it accordingly, as in the first instruction over the fracture; the cord should be narrower here, then wider again; and it should be medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax yarn; because if the cord is too thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their knots from twisted flax, and this is a great error, because the knot cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each elbow.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the heads of arrows after resetting the shoulder in a healthy state, place linen or linen bandages under them so they do not fester.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the veins are broken, I will tell the cure afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	Know this: it is not necessary to bind all broken limbs tightly on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limbs are large, no need to apply hot irons before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your confidence in the abscess healing; and here is the ancient method for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that is held on the mill walls, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, into use, and this is the common method of healing fractures in various ways, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take aloes, linseed oil, turpentine, balm of Gilead, mastic, in equal amounts; myrrh and aloeswood, 5 times the amount; and seven times as much alum; make powder from them, mix with enough egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, as it has a good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and it benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another method for healing twisting: take mugwort and mastic, mix 10 parts; mirrh and aloes, mix 9 parts; acacia 6 parts; Armenian bole 10 parts, grind well, and mix with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method of splinting for joints and dislocated bones, soothing the pain that occurs, and reducing it with a chisel and breaking: take new linen, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the joint or bone.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not restore [the damage], but it is good for soothing abscess heat and proper bone pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster for broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthy parsley, grind them together to make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of plaster for the healing of a broken bone and to hasten the healing of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of vismalve, camomile, viola flowers, powder of beech leaves, each one part; grind them and mix with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, mix it with coriander water or vinegar and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of application stronger than the first, when the abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of comfrey, flax, balm of Gilead, lupine, and wild cucumber, and flowers of violets and camomile, all in one part; grind, and concoct with vinegar, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that nothing but a beeswax and oil ointment should be put on the broken member for restoration, and no other thing more, and says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one should place warm, slightly dry things on the broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat a wound and pain: take ground mugwort and horse hooves that have been boiled, or feathers of birds, and sow thistle, equal amounts, grind them and make a poultice out of it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then release the joint a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if it does not release on its own. Release it by hand, but if pain comes to the place, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten, and release it, and remove the dislocated cartilage immediately; take a light cloth, and a damp sponge of the sea, dip it in water, and lift up the joint, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen moistened with water or rose oil on it, and tie it with a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is heated; and soothe the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then start the subtle reduction again, a little at a time, and not too forcefully as before; and reduce it gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess swells and reddens and hurts, and it needs to be lanced and sutured, proceed as you did the first time equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if no inflammation comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it before three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break heals and approaches the joint with flesh; then hold it longer than before, and let the tissue thicken its meat, as I have said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter therein; therefore, moisten it with warm water, every third day, and loosen a little the bandage; by this means cut off the nourishment from the limb, and hasten healing of what the foolish surgeon allows to remain twisted: this is bad, and it is an unsafe practice, and I see nothing but laziness and working incorrectly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many kinds of fractures exist and have various shapes, and their causes are specific; for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the shaft breaks the entire bone up to the shaft that is beneath the bone, as happens with a hack or cleaver; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hackure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	when the sword strikes the bone from above it pierces through, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and these two types of fractures are either large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion filled, or cut, or from wounds of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the break penetrates through to the membrane under the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if the wound is sunk into the bone as thinly as a hair, and it has a small crack, then this type of fracture is called "capillare"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, falling, or similar things, and makes the bone piece enter below, and the ends of the bone are cut like blacksmiths do when they hammer on cauldrons; where the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more to those who have a moist head bone, as in the case of a child's skull; and it occurs in all these ways of fracture where small parts are dislocated, such as splinters; and I will speak about it later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all types of breaks through dissection above them, and the examination by probing, and the corruption of the flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known to those who, when the bone has been exposed and rubbed inward, if it opens the black crack will appear.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be careful about the patient's condition, and if you see any harmful symptoms like vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fainting, high fever, hairs falling out and turning red, and other similar signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any doubtful symptoms and hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound first comes to you in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth moon within which you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is corrupted, and come the events we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the fracture of the bone reaches up to the skin that covers the brain, you must cut the fractured part as follows: it is necessary to grab the patient's head firmly, and expose the bone on all sides in any way you can, and over the figure of the wound more gently than you can; and if drainage of blood comes out to expose the bone, or pus accumulates, assist with whatever is needed; and fill the area with dampened linen soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the pus subsides and be sure there is no more bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you make a deep notch in front, and it is called the oblique way.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made with iron instruments; and work lightly, so that you do not wound the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is protruding and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you administer incisions with drills, not cutting through the bone of the head, but having a margin or circle above the point to prevent the drill from passing through the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place along the length of the bone, so that you have drills for all sides; and this is the shape of the four types of drills.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for drilling around the broken bone are that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the drill to another part a little afterwards, and do this all around, then remove the chips of the bone that are between the holes, and do this as delicately and lightly as possible, as we have said, until you pull out the bone or any of the instruments you have such as pliers or forceps; and be careful not to touch the brain or the marrow.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you retract the fragment that remains of the bone to all other similar instruments, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors; and if something remains of the small bones or scales, gently remove them with the tools; then cure the wound with cauterization and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work is that which the Greeks call (it), which is more reliable; and it is highly praised, and this is its statement.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you must expose part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed that part, place it under the tip of the chisel-like instrument as shown in this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 Do not cut in one part, and the fragment should be split into two sides, so that the saw is toward the bone; then strike with a small hammer so you lightly split the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath; if it is attached to the bone, gently remove it, for it is often broken without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the fracture does not pierce through to the cloth and the bone is only chopped from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smooth that roughness, and remove scales with a sharp scraper of various sizes, in order to provide the most suitable amount, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	The patient should shave his head completely first with a large razor, then with finer ones afterwards, and continue to do so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other kind of haircut and subtle break, you must bring the instrument according to his discretion; and this is not a matter that can be answered by one who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the wound is open, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled over once or twice, wet it with wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible, so as not to burden the wound, then administer more linen over it but do not tie it too tight that it only covers the wound; and leave it like that for a day or two until the abscess subsides, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily root, oat flour, incense powder, and similar things; and make a powder from these things and put it on the wound, and administer immediate medications without poisoning; and ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or pus, because when pus gathers on the linen cloth, it will rot and decay, causing great harm to the patient; for when something sharp is put on the wound, it may rot from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, this is cause for doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness does not come violently except for medicine that has been applied there, it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in wax the cloth, and put it on top; then treat it with methods of treatments as necessary until it heals completely.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or one part alone, because there are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilage, which does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you grind your little finger or thumbnail and equal the breakage inside your index finger cavity, and at the knuckle by pressure, until the nail grows again according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, you should place a small stick equal to the height of the root of the finger there.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If the breakage is in two parts, do the same, and hasten to restore it the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the abscess has calmed down, then insert linen thread tentatively at the root of the nail where the breakage is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you place another on the other side if there is a break there; and let the bandages be as thick as they fill the neck openings.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said any remedy that one must soak the tents in butter and churn them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It seems not to be good, but it is required that they should be soaked in a concoction of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the tendon until the bone becomes hard, and the cartilages become tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers from an owl are put in place of tents, and if it is covered with a thin cloth, and the opening is held closed, breath the patient through; then do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes out while you are working on it, put beeswax or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of sulphur there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If abscesses do not come, apply an ointment on the outside, made from flour of wheat and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk; then put light bandages on it and do not bind it too tightly; if the break in the bone is small and broken into many pieces, remove them using suitable tools, then stitch the wound, and treat the injured flesh, healing, and sewing, as ointments and ointments appropriate for that purpose; and if there is no injury inside the bone, cure the tendon, and put cotton plugs in it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	on the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated beneath [something], and there is no wound outside, and the break is only outside, but not broken through, unless hollow inside, it can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the break is in the left mandible, insert your index finger of the right hand and gently push it inside, then adjust it evenly with the other hand from outside.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the mandible is dislocated at two joints, then you must administer extension of two parts until it is equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or rupture, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place a bandage on the broken jaw and place .i. double cloth over it; and place over the cloth a large well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and attach it above the muzzle that you can, and command the patient to rest, and nourish light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day and then reposition what has changed; place a plaster over it with flour from the mill mixed with egg or flour from a sieve, after you have removed the bandage; and place light linen over the plaster, and if the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it heals within four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come up, bring what we have said before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, observe that no piece of the bone has been removed; it requires subtle instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrowed, expand (it) with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have removed all the pieces and none remain, then stitch (the) wound if it is wide, and place on it one plaster suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks multiple times towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when there is a fracture with an open wound, that you have two attendants, one holding the shoulder where the force breaks, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then place the dislocation in your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you need to extend further, place a round ball of fabric or linen over the patient's shoulder, as thick as necessary; stretch and tie the force (the fracture), hold the ball with your hand, and align the dislocation as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards due to it being fully closed, then the patient must lie on their affected side and place one hand under the shoulder; and push the shoulder downwards, until the bones of the socket are raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you cut across [the bone]; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot join due to any hindrance, then crush it at one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to hold it in place.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it seems like a spoon, and is not hollow, and should be as large as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two openings, as you see, and one wide, and the other narrow, as the wound is when treating the bones; and when you are certain that it is an abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt that it is an abscess, use cloths and linen, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if it is hot abscesses that come, soak one linen cloth in rose oil, asafetida and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone when it has wounds and incisions is to put a plaster of mill powder and egg yolk on the bone, and place light bandages over it, and if you need it, place a splint under the affected area; then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, put two layers of cloth over the bandages, and the plaster; then take a thin stick of three feet long and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang out; and place the stick over the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the affected shoulder and the affected arm; and tighten each part separately, and when you see that the fracture heals properly and you can clearly see that the stick does not move from the broken bone, keep it in place every day, and when the ligaments loosen, tighten it again; and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the affected area to raise the shoulder; if the fracture aligns with the force of the shoulder through the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except for bad accidents, until twenty days have passed; then resume plastering, if needed, and tighten it and leave it in place until it is healed; and it will be healed most in twenty-eight days, and less with some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 It happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates and one cannot move it except through touch; then one arranges it according to the shape of the break, and sets it back in place according to its natural form in all possible ways; then put powder from the mill on top with a lot of egg and light splints, and cover it with double cloth; then put a large and thin needle over it, about a little larger than the shoulder, and if there are any humps anywhere on the shoulder, use linen splints to fill them so that the needle becomes smooth; and then tie it all firmly in one great bind, so that the needle does not move from its place, and watch the ligament every day; and each time it softens, tighten it, and make the needle equal if it is out of its place, and lay the patient on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. When this number is reached, loosen it, and be careful because it is not easy for a bone to become dislocated lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone part protrudes in front and not under the skin, lift it up and cut it, and do as we have said to treat an abscess using hot cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture (the) thigh
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The fracture is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks near the edge.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken in the middle, it sinks downward and causes the patient great pain, without help, immediately, and sometimes blood comes out from the fractured bones, and the fracture is opened widely, and everything hurts a lot.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on their back, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two costal arches with both hands, subtlety adjusting it to be even in all ways possible, until the figure of the bone is as required; then put pressure bandages and poultices made of salt or a lighter material, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the limb round repeatedly, and tighten it gently, and examine every hour if it softens, if it becomes soft then tighten it again; and if it requires dislocation due to corrosion or itching at the location, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and dislocate it, remove the pressure bandage, and treat the one who has come with remedies of cures; then reset the pressure bandage and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the ribs fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Note that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones posterior to the back and at the neck inside, and they bend only because they are slippery; and it is well felt in the examination of the hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the restoration is that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then put the plaster and bind with a stick if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture is inclined inside, the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, like pleurisy, for the bone pierces the flesh; the armpits swell, and they immediately vomit a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have made many efforts to cure it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, in order to push the fracture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not allow hot irons to come if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have come, make it healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said one of us puts blisters on the limb to ripen it, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the blisters attract excessive fluid to the limb due to its weak condition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said one should cover the limb with damp linen dipped in hot oil and place poultices between the ribs to make the swelling equal around it, then let it be treated with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the fractured bone and there is doubt in the patient's mind, then it is necessary to make an incision on the side of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place instruments under it for support; and then you must cut the bone, draw it out gently, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes, lay it on soft cloth soaked in rose oil and place it there; and cure the side of it that needs to be treated with abscess, and lie it often on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes breaks occur in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it bends; and similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is mortal in many positions, and if it does not move or feel when you strain and prick it, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient should be cured, if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if something similar happens in the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are soft, and if accidents happen that are in hands, and above the back there is a sudden jump and evacuation without willing; and when it is put on the stomach, it jumps again without willing.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is placed on the back and it wants to sit down, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is fatal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not happen, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward [the patient] if there is an abscess that is hot, you place on it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then put one of the soothing and drying plasters on top, bind it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he recovers.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone dislocates, you must cover it with oil; then remove the bone, join the two edges of the wound together with a stitch, if it is large, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," put your left thumb in its place and hold it equal to your right hand, then apply the plaster and splint, if necessary; then tighten it, and if any bone dislocates again, you must fix it, remove the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there is only a little lessening at the head; it becomes long, bends towards the groin, and comes to the patient pain at the place where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break; and recognize what the break is and the shape of it; and if the break is only at the head, then make the break equal to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it bends inside, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that break is presented to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, place the splint on it, then place a stick or a yew branch on top and hold the fracture so it does not move; and press the joint beneath the ribs until they are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess has broken out, do not touch it until it is soothed, and place what we have previously mentioned on top of it; then return to treatment, and hold it as needed, if there is no bad event; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	the shoulder blade is that which is between the ribs and the neck of the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two manners: one of which is that you take a rod thicker than your little finger, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads together with two rods, and pass them over the top, and place the patient on one seat; then lower his broken arm onto the rod, until it reaches the shoulder joint, and attach a splint of rod in the middle, then raise it above some heavy object or have the ministers extend it below; then place the mirrors the breaker's hands together, until the breaker returns as required.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way it is that one binds the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one holds where it is above the break with his hands, and the others hold below all the way, and each extends to their respective parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 If you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the assistants to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the break is near the shoulder joint, you must put a splint beneath it and on the other side, below the break; and in the same way, if the break is toward the outside, you should put a light splint without effort, until the break is even with the joint and with the skin; then make it equal and hold it, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess does come, do not hold it for more than 7 days, and put soft linen with rose oil on it until the abscess is soothed; then hold it, and the method of holding it is that you place a plaster on the break, then raise the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; and hold the cloth, and hold it on the shoulder, and on the arm, such that the arm is in a straight line, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint above the fracture, with one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to pass over the fracture by two inches on each side; then hold the splints as I have said at the beginning of the chapter regarding the fracture, more firmly and less in loosening.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 If you see the swelling and constriction, as we have said, during the process of restoring a broken limb, and you doubt an abscess has formed, leave it to heal for seven days as we have said; then examine every three days the bandage, to ensure that pus does not swell or come to the area, nor the nails become too tight on the limb because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if such an accident does not occur, it should not be dislocated before three days or more, and the patient should lie on his back and have his hands on his stomach; and put beneath the shoulder a cushion filled with equal wool, and observe every hour of the day or night whether the figure of the broken limb moves or the tendons are softened; if it is immobile by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat that we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the meat is first tender; and when it begins to heal, it should become large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is custom that the shoulder and leg should be set right within 40 days altogether; and then you must dislocate it and administer baths and ointments to straighten it.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 If the structure (joint) is deformed and swollen, it takes days or two months to dislocate it.
de la brisure du bras	Of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones which are called the "forearm," of which one is small and it's the one that forms the wrist; and the other is large, and it's the one that is below, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large forearm can break, or only the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When small bladder stones are broken, the restoration (treatment) is easy, and healing is quick; but when large ones are broken, healing is poor, and it hurts more than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only the small bladder stone is broken, it should be gently stretched out and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large bladder stone that is broken, it must be tightened more strongly; stretch it up over the funnel (a device used during urinary stone removal), and bend the thumb of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the others, and the patient should cross his arms over himself and the funnel above him to prevent any pain; then the attendant should extend his arm to the part below, where he holds the patient's hand or rope, and another attendant extends his arm above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then set the limb even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is a fracture in several pieces, put each one back into its place; and if there is any displacement that pierces the skin which you cannot restore to its place, cut off and remove the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if it is with the break causing an open wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take care for its treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if at the beginning of treatment abscesses appear, apply a plaster made of rose oil and white beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft; and attach the plaster carefully until the abscesses subside.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the plaster, and apply a poultice of flour milled with egg, then place the splints, and let the splint from the fracture be stronger and slightly wider than the others; and know that it should have six splints or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more above the fracture than elsewhere, and always less on the sides, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard or dry; and let the thread, which holds it together, be of linen, not too thick or thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And hold the member and the limb for some days after.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 If any bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that happens on the member, then you must irrigate the member with hot water until the itching is eased; and allow the member not to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Then begin the binding, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, as well as anything similar, advise accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If the urine cannot reach the limb because it is too narrow, then you must soften it for a short while and let it be for some days until the urine flows through it, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things mentioned above come to the patient, do not remove the dressing for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 If it is an injury around the neck, hold his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and keep him from movement and tilting; sleep on his back. Know that this break will heal in thirty or thirty-five days, and sometimes in twenty, depending on the compositions and complexions of the properties.
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	In the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few breaks, and they occur many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or fractured, the patient should lie flat on his back and stretch out straight in front of him equally; then place his hand above a cloth and extend the broken bones, aligning them with mirrors, until they are well joined; apply a plaster and wadding if an abscess does not appear, then apply a splint according to the size of the fracture; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the back of the sole near the belly of the foot, make a splint from cloths and instruct the patient to strap his broken foot to it; then fasten a long cloth, and the splint should be as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is open, then you should place a splint above and another one below in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If a fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, you should make it even as necessary; and hold it with the sole, and if you see that you place a straight small splint to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, you should make them even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie all of them in one place, which is better, or place a splint on it, as for the thumb; and take care in the restoration and placement of the abscess heat, and treat those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	fractured shin
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the shin are often broken, and it is easily seen when they twist forward and backward; and the restoration [of the bone] is that one tie [a splint] is placed above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends their tie evenly to their respective parts; and this is when the break is at the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the leg, it should be one of the joints toward the ankle, and the other joints below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if it is near the knee, then it should be the joints below the knee, and the extension beyond; then set the bone equal to its two hands, according to its natural figure, and then apply the splint, and the bandage, unless an abscess comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess heated (treated with heat), let it be allowed to cool down before returning to your work and treatment; the procedure is carried out in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 You should cover the break with a bandage double in one or three layers, and keep the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the groin, and pass the thread long between the leg and thigh, below the knee, and bring the ends of the thread above; then turn the leg and the bandage upwards, then put supports on the break and a support on the bone of the leg; then use a strip of soft cloth for the strapping, to equalize the tension, then begin to tie three or four turns around the break; and as you go higher from the break, loosen it less; then take the two threads that you passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three supports on top, then return to below the end of the thread, so that you come down to the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as it is, unless an abscess or swelling or any other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is a swelling or any piece of the bone that protrudes, you should cut it off if possible; and if not, you should break the area and draw out the pus; and treat it as we have said before until it heals completely.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the leg is broken in such a way as if one sets a splint, as in the shoulder or arm; however, during restoration, it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the leg is restored within one day, or a little more or less, according to the differences in complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the leg (genuine)
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not really broken, but rather a crack or piercing, and there is pain in every place, and this hurts a lot.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: When equalizing the bone that is broken to its place, it should be assembled as much as possible; then put the splint, and place a round stick there if needed, and hold it in place as necessary, then check all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as abscess heat and similar things; apply to each accident what is required, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called the shinbone or "mustelz," and the other is called the fibula; and it breaks similarly to the arm, and therefore the repair is the same as for the arm, and the treatment is the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg twists in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bone is broken, it bends forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 If the large bone is broken, there is great pain, and it can be seen; and it turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply extension, make it even, and tie the sticks equally; however, if the fracture is crooked, and there are more pieces, let the extension be smaller and lighter; align accordingly to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two handfuls of straw that cover the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap it in two layers, one on top and one underneath, and tie it in the middle so that the leg cannot tilt to the right or left, and this is good; and no one should place one bandage of the length of the leg, and it should be of straw, and place the leg for protection against movement, and do this at the break where there is pain; move the leg every day to see if there is abscess or other accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break of bones, but at times there is a break in the foot and toes, and it does not occur often except in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the foot bones, and you see these bones rising one above the other, put the patient on his back on the ground, as if he wants to go, then place your foot on top of the injured one where the bones have risen, then press it until they return to their place; then apply a splint and bandage, and put a small plank under the foot with two flat pieces, then tighten the bandage around the foot in the usual way, after you have wrapped fabric around it, and other things that are needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandage as you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said about the hand bones; then set a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and it should be slightly larger, then place a table beneath the splinted area as I have said, and apply pressure as needed; and if there are more than 2, or 3, or more broken bones, set a splint on each one according to their quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the table beneath the splinted area; and it should be positioned so that it covers the belly of the bone, so that it touches well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not neglect the other things I have said about other fractures, after what has been said; and treat each case according to its need.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the bone of a woman's body is broken, let her sit upright, then lean it to the small of her back and hold it from behind; then fill the wound with cotton for the patient and put as much cotton as needed inside; then press the woman down, and lift the buttock little by little, then pull the cotton out until it reaches the entrance of the wound, and let the bone return with the stick; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or so: the fracture will be healed, and if you see, take a bladder of barley straw, tie one end of a string to it, and insert the whole bladder into the wound; then blow strongly through the string until the bladder is inflated inside: the bone will return to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone at the elbow of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the humerus bone; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and skill to them, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 Breaks indicate in various ways the right way of restoration: therefore read on.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for 3 or more days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For that one who has breakage with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or something similar, he must be bandaged now, so that the bandages that we have said bear witness to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, then anoint it with vinegar, if you do not have anything else, then proceed to restore the breakage in that same hour, or on that day, if abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you would cause a bad event to happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and appears exposed at the edge of the wound, you must gently set it in place with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the fractured bone pieces do not align themselves to be set in place by your hands, you must use this instrument which is made of iron, about 7 or 8 inches long, and as wide as the size of the wound; and for this reason, the mirror should grasp 3 or 4 (depending on what is required in each case of fracture), and it should be round and somewhat large but not too thin so that it does not bend during your work on the limb, and it should be sharp at the front end and thick from the middle to the tip, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "humerus", because the curved head of the bone must be placed on top of the visible part of the bone; and push it once, until it returns to its original position, and ensure that one side is equal to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 If the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone, you must cut the head of the bone so that the instrument has enough power to do it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your power; then remove that which is left in the bone by sharp cutting and small scrapes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Then place it in its natural position, moisten the linen cloth with black stitched wine if it is summer, and not on oil or any other substance that may cause corruption on the wound; afterwards administer medicine when you have reset the bone, leave the wound exposed, and cover it around according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted by the fracture; many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, causing either death or corruption for the patient, and therefore, let the bandage be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accident may come, as we have said, and you find pain at the place, do not put stitches on it; but wrap around, in place of stitches, hard bandages, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And if the following day or two you notice pus forming on the wound, remove what you have put on it and apply healing salve for wounds, such as treacle of antimony and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, at morning and evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be placed so that the bone moves down gently towards the inside.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but goes down again, since there are small fragments of bones, you must try to cure the wound and remove all those loose fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 If a fistula (or another form of corruption) appears at the place, you must treat it, as he has said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 If the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bone, or other similar large bones, do not try to draw it out because many times death comes from it; but leave it until it can be pulled; perhaps it will shrink in about 20 or 30 days. Then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The arriving blisters on the sores
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	There are often many times after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the shape of the limb; and unfortunately, the limbs cannot perform their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, be careful if we are sick: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saracocola, acacia, and similar ones; so take any of these things or all together, and grind them with a sharp vinegar or with enough egg white or oil; then place it on the wound in poultices, and hold it tightly and do not remove it for many days; and then open it, and start another one, until the node is removed; or you can apply a well-made wooden plank, because the properties of wood are that it removes all inflammations from limbs. If the node has turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then you chop it off with a knife, and make the excess apparent; or you scrape it with any rasp, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak limb after care
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is restored and remains weak and fragile afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one of them being that it was tied too tightly, not as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, preventing the nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to excessive movement, not in its hour; or due to a lack of blood in the body, causing it to be weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body lean until the blood is multiplied in him; administer a bath, give joy and comfort; then put wax on the limb so that the wax attracts great nourishment to it, and let the swelling be often reduced with cold water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, yet it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and possibly death. Yet, if the swelling and pain are fresh, they must be treated with hot, cooling water or softening herbs such as comfrey leaves, roots, medicks, etc.; make one poultice made of a mollifying substance like daisy, and take the musk of comfrey, mix it with gelatin oil or sesame oil, and make a poultice. Or you can make a poultice from ripe figs ground with wheat bran, etc., and similar medicines that alleviate the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes, the dislocation is removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And movements should be brought to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is swollen and hardened, like stone, and it requires to be cut with iron, it should be covered up to the bone, at the subtle incision gently made; and apply cushion and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be reset carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if one waits, the limb swells, and in case it is reset at that time; therefore, it should not be moved until it has diminished: many times it causes pus and other pain; however, when this happens, let the patient cleanse himself, then leave him, until the abscesses have subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently stretch it, and treat each limb as needed according to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated in several ways; and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are slightly dislocated from their places, becoming somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and the saliva flows out of the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it returns through multiple positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is complete and finished, then you must quickly reset it, without delay, and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and pushes one of his fingers from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other hand should be spread open, to make it even; and instruct the patient to soften, his lower jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror (or instrument) should make it even until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jaws (or broken bones) are dislocated, apply hot water and oil to them, moving them gently until they are reset; do not force it to return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they [the dislocated joints] are reset equally, and the patient closes the mouth well with a soft poultice made of rose oil and wax, then place it lightly on several bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders between two cushions so that he does not move either to the right or left, nor forces himself in any way, but takes light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws [shoulders] are healed; then gradually eat what he wants lightly, and do not force himself to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are completely healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour and are not turned to their places, fevers and accustomed sweats occur, and possibly the rupture of the stomach, and by chance, the vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a disaster; and many times he who experiences it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the collarbone
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot dislocate towards the chest or the hip, and it dislocates sometimes outwards, and one can feel this happening.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoring [of dislocated joints] is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint firmly with his palm, and it will return; then apply the bandage and bind it; and the shoulder which is towards the costal region cannot dislocate again; if not, and if it dislocates once, reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the bandage and bind it, and tell the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way, the shoulders of the back are restored when they are dislocated from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways: one is when it dislocates at the top part of the socket joint beneath; the second is at the hip joint; and by chance it may dislocate above the hip joint, which rarely happens; it does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside the nerves; and it often dislocates below the socket towards the shoulder, especially in those with little flesh, as it easily goes back into place; but in those with enough flesh, it jumps back to its place with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess hot, and thinks that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must check, as long as you are sure; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that the dislocations when going towards the shoulder, there is a difference between the sick and healthy shoulder, and you will find differences between them; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below the socket at the point of the top of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its place nor make any movements; and similarly, when dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will perceive it clearly on touch; and this manner of dislocation is not easily remedied, when it is new, or when the nerves are weak.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his thumb under the joint, and forcibly bends the joint upward to its place; the minister then lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it back; it will come back quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in the hands on certain days afterwards, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and provide them with soothing and softening medicine such as a concoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be given to them; then place the patient on their back, and put a piece of linen equal in size beneath the affected shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of another person on the linen, and carefully lift the head of the shoulder; and another person holds the hand of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder immediately returns to its place, and if you see it dislocating again in this manner: then ensure a person who is larger than the patient is present; and be facing towards their side, and push the affected shoulder beneath the patient's affected shoulder, and lift the affected shoulder upwards so the patient hangs in the air; and another person pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, he cannot bear any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 It is also done in another way: it is when a long thorn is placed into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea and not too big or too small; then it is placed under the patient with cloths soft on top, and the patient lies along the pole; then his hand is extended on the other side in this manner, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, perform this cure: take a thorn from two strong branches and four finger-widths wide, which has the tip rounded to be inserted deeply under the ascle, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay the rod on top of the head covered with the cloth so that it does not prick the patient, then place him under the patient's ass; extend one arm over the rod and fasten the shoulder to the rod, and hold the hand at the end of the arm, then place the arm on one side of a wide yoke, and extend the other hand below; leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return to its place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in its place, in whatever way that may be, you must put a equal length of wool under the ass; then apply a plaster made from mill powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then bind it under the ass accordingly, and turn the string around the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little food, until the limb is comforted, because it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it becomes hard and is not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is moved out of its place by moisture or for any other reason, then you must administer fire cautery at three places, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot stay in place or lift the arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is pinched or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	A dislocation that is towards the hip or backside is caused by an impact and stretching of hands, and other methods are applied for its treatment; it should be treated until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if afterwards, when the member is healed, there comes swelling and slow movement, the patient should use baths many times until the swelling subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	The cost of dislocation is...
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint is dislocated at the point, and it returns to the point; and if it has dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, because it can be seen well and felt well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when joining the broken bone with the healthy one, make sure you can see them clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is swollen and cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as soon as the abscess comes to be open, for if the abscess comes to be open, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset completely, especially when it is at the back; it is worth more than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps there comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that you extend your two hands to it; its arms should be spread out, and its hands according to the bone all around, above and below, and push the joint back to its places together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and bites the root of the palm that has been dislocated. (Translated line-by-line)
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 If it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is best if two people extend the arm, and two apply oil to the joint to soften it, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double-folded cloth around it; and when the eyes join the joint to their hand, anoint it with some oil for softening, then push the joint together firmly until it returns; and when it is in its place, apply dry plaster with egg, and hold it firmly, and let the arm hang from the neck of the patient for several days, then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it as it is; if you see that the joint does not bind well, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then remove the bandage.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if there is pain after the resetting of the joint and it becomes stiff, bathe and scrub it well, press until it is soothed; or you put a sheep's wool grease on the jointure, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it, and make it enter the water; and when it weeps, wipe the jointure gently, then replace the wool, and then enter it in the water again; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, put warm moist hay straw on it with butter and apply pressure; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocations of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and it returns easily, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place as quickly as possible, immediately when it is dislocated, unless the muscles are swollen or there is hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the repositioning should be done by placing the affected hand on a table, and extending the fingers of the minister, and aligning the injured hand so that its palm is above the appearance of the jointure, and press it until it returns to its original position; then you must observe if it is correctly placed; then have the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's palm on the table and have them place their hand above the affected joint area.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, it's fine; if not, apply pressure to soothe abscesses with poultices, and let him feel the beginning of relief.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back after some days, the dislocation remains twisted, causing the patient no benefit as long as his hand is numb and unable to exert any force; then understand that the nerve or artery has been cut; there is no other remedy but to straighten by cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, put the plaster as we have said on it, then hold it and leave for 5 days, then remove it and leave in this manner.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well and there is no pain, apply warm moist cloth and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of fingers in the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the belly; then stretch it, and push the dislocation towards your pocket until it returns, then hold the head of the thumb, and turn it towards the part where it was disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then make it equal to that day; and tie it, as we have said, and untie it by a day, and make it move, and reattach it; and do this often, until it is straight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The displacement of the vertebra of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebra of the back or neck is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations without treatment, the patient quickly dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are that the excrement jumps spontaneously, cannot be held, and many times, any member is softened, or both knees or the two arms or legs; sometimes the spine becomes mute in four parts; the one which becomes mute at the rear is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you observe if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if it has not, there is no remedy nor healing for it from the beginning.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And that which falls down or from blows or similar things, the old healers used to say the methods of cures with great words, but there is no benefit in all; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the gilbositeit that comes before, there is neither trick nor health; and similarly, the one that comes straight on two sides, and cannot be cured except by the one that comes at the back, as I have said; and it is that the patient should lie flat in a single place, and have restraint underneath him, so he does not bleed; then insert the iron rod into the head in the earth, and another into the limbs, and tie a rope over the patient's body, and another around the ankles, and knees, and wrists; and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the limbs, between the two iron rods; and they should be well tightened, the rods as we have said, and the attendants place their palms on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if it does not return by this cure, take a board that is three arms long and flat underneath, and the patient should be on their side. Push the head of the board beneath them. Then place the middle of the board upon the spine; place the hands on the other end of the board, and press hard until it returns to its place; if you see that it does not, do it at the turning point which turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And take two needles of a large arm's length, and place them on the patient's head, one on each side, with a palm's length between each needle; and have a notch in each needle where the turn can be, and ensure that the needles are firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between the two needles have a turning needle, like how links turn, and have two small needles of a palm's length on the turning needle to turn it; then tie the cord that is among the ankles to the turning needle towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet at the other turning needle, and each of the assistants turns their turning needle according to the cord, and the master adjusts the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is healed (the dislocation), place a drying plaster on it with much egg white, then press it, then apply the iron rod of three feet long, which penetrates the hollow part of the joint and the healthy part of the vertebra, then tie it with a cord as we have said, and use subtle medicines to keep it healthy until it is healed; and if anything comes at the end of healing, administer soothing and softening medicines, with the iron rod as mentioned above; and sometimes a piece of wood is administered, and sometimes the appearance is in the back vertebra of the spine, and it is thought to be dislocation; and this is the bone that opens up, for which one should not have any presumption: perhaps death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the neck
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the dislocations of the neck and shoulder come from nothing but dislocations solely, not otherwise as in other joints; and the joint of the neck is dislocated along four parts: inside and outside, front and back, more inside than otherwise, and less so in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open at the knee for the sick than the healthy; and the sick cannot double their knees in fire; and it is the joint that is dislocated swollen with abscess that is hot, because the heads of the thigh come there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of this coming outward, it is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of this happening in front are that his leg is well positioned according to the completion; however, do not double the knee due to pain, and if you want him to walk, he cannot move forward, and retains urine, and inflames the ankle, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of this happening behind are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and the leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thighbone is in its place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are as follows: you should verify if the dislocations are old and remain according to their position without any treatment; there is no need for presumptions.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those whose dislocation is fresh and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you should hasten to turn the joint, pushing it inward and outward, and moving it from right to left; possibly it will return, and no other treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must summon a strong minister, and hold the leg firmly in his hands, or tie it with a cord above the knee; and another minister extends his hand thus that he pushes his hands beneath the knees, then tightens a soft cord above the thigh; and another holds the cord at the head; and extend upward and downward all at once, so that the patient rises from the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good;
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If the shoulder is not in place, it requires treatment for its appearance. When the dislocation is at the front, you must first support the patient on their healthy side, then tie a cord around the root of the thigh and the area below the angle (of the affected shoulder), then tighten the cord towards the angle and the joint; then take another assistant to grasp the large part of the affected thigh, stretch it outward in the opposite direction; it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in place as we have said, you must tie the two feet of the patient together tightly with a soft cord around their two heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended by two feet more than the others; then hang them from a post above the ground, and stretch both arms out long; then command the assistant to grasp the top of the thigh, and let another assistant hold it suspended along with the patient, as they grab hold of the thigh in the shape of a bow, because the joint will return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is at its extreme, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one with dislocated shoulder, and pulls the ligament above the affected leg properly, and also above the pelvis; then place two rods, one at the head and another at the feet; then thrust the rod between the knees of the patient so that it lines up the dislocation; and wrap moist cloths around it to prevent blistering, then each minister stretches out towards him, and the mirror places his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place him on a bed and press as we have said in the dislocated shoulder, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	When the dislocation is in front, it's necessary to extend the affected leg immediately, and as I have said; place the mirror on the opposite side of the dislocation, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is to the outer side, it should not extend the patient's lower body downwards, nor raise it up above the ground, but rather keep it as when a woman is dislocated to the outer side, as we have said in the lying on two beds; and let it be on its backside, and the limb extended as we have said before, and press firmly on the joint at the table; and it will be right when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then align the thighs, put the pillow, and bind them with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then unbind, put the pillow again; and if you see that they are even, bind as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind, and let him walk well, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in four ways: inside and outwards, backwards, but not forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet; then take his thigh with your hands, pull it between your hands, then bend the two sides of the thigh together; let another servant extend his foot until the thigh returns to its place, and the signs are that it should be easy for him to bend his leg at the knee slightly; put the plaster on, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly for three or four days, then release it; do not make the patient walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of fractures, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated, from within and out of place.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs that the ankle is dislocated are when it swells and protrudes at the part where it is dislocated: the repositioning should be easy, and it must be gently extended to the hands only when it has been reduced.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold the leg by the ankle, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, then lift it up, and push the foot up forcefully; do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start again because it may return; and if it cannot return in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and firmly fix the stirrup (passageil) firmly in the ground between his knees, and cover with cloths so as not to hurt the patient; then hold the leg, and another person holds the healthy leg above the ankle or the knee, keeping it up at the neck of the foot; then each person should extend equally, and the stirrup should be close to the ankles of the patient to hold him down when lifting; then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation in their hands, and another person holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is in place, put the plaster and wool on top, bind firmly, and tie the thigh to the leg, keeping the nerves above the ankle from being too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding softens, tighten it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and send the patient to walk for four days; and if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two [parts] are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without strain, and it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any direction between the thigh and the foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or bed straight up, and place your foot over the affected joints, then press firmly on the foot until it returns to its original position; when it is even and there is no gap, put two small tables under the heel of the foot, then bind it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, the patient often dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and slow; and use at first cooling remedies for the abscess, and let the patient be in God's hand if you see no hope of healing; and when you see hope, reset the limb to its place immediately as the abscess comes to life; and when the limb is in place, administer cooling remedies for the abscess, and treat the wound as necessary, with drying ointments; and if there is a break in the bone due to dislocation, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of entering into fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and because of the wisdom of your weapons and body.
Amen	 Amen (In English)
