O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine by filling it with its contents, and have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is scarce in our region and is lacking in every detail, the science has perished and been cut away, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have executed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions have been closed, and the science has been forsaken.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revitalize it all together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will bring together the forms of the cautery tools, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation thereof, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behooves him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he know the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and their movement and veins moving and at rest, and from what place they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, Hippocrates said that the needle with the knot is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We hereby state in the introduction to this book that whoever is not aware of the matters previously mentioned should take care lest he make a mistake and deceive people; thus, I have often wished that more of those who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience would refrain from doing so.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who incised the abscess of scrofula or throat of a woman, and incised the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood issued forth that the woman died in her own hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another surgeon who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; so he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well knew that if he were cut he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treating the duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the breaking instrument made a wound; and the doctors full of ignorance placed the break on the wound with strong ligatures, and left no part of the wound without salve, and left it thus until the end; and he commanded that he not displace it at all; and remained thus until the leg became completely swollen and the foot rotted away.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to free the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways when corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And let another mirer collapse the anchored abscess, and then inflame it through the wickedness of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not matter to touch it with iron if it is in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear student, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, those where there is danger in many positions. I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you. If you take your arms in counsel, and undertake your sick lightly and firmly, and use the best way so by the grace of God you come to salvation and be joyful; and leave the fearful diseases of grief sanity; and remove your arms from those who cause you doubt, and have faith in them that you may go from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a false disease, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have discussed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and water-cautery medicines, and the chapters are ordered from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the metal tools for cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things; and are ordered from the head down to the feet, with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we recall the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid and of the harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and the secret answers; and about these many wise ones spoke, and agreed with them; and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery aids universally in all temperaments where there is matter; for there are two temperaments: namely, hot temperament due to matter, and dry temperament due to matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry temperament with matter, some discussed and said that the fire cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not useful for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat diseases that are already hot or dry; and those who say the opposite state that the fire cautery does great aid to hot and dry diseases that affect the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And moreover, do not meddle with it except those who have proven it, and who know the chapter on cautery through long use, the diversity of the temperaments of men, their dispositions and causes of diseases, their symptoms and the space of time; we have no fear from other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the signs gathered and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery altogether with heat is of the secrets of treatments, and has greater goodness than a burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and only affects the part that is cauterized, and does not harm other parts little by little.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medicines that burn come from one part to another by diffusion, and cause diseases in other parts hindering healing; and by chance, the patient might die from the fire due to its intensity and the quality of its substance unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experiment and the long course of service and study I have devoted to the art, which is based on the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse the length of my words, as it pleases me not to deprive you of the secret that lies in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when the fire cauteries should be performed, and they chose the times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is suitable in all times, for the harm coming on is kept away by means of the cautery; and especially when the cautery is for pains urgent and necessary that cannot wait for the time until greater mischief arises in the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think so, dear son, as do the foolish doctors; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no return. And they say thus: but it is not as they believe, for a cautery is merely medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worthier than other medicines for its speed of effect and the virtue of its action and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes once according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and in him are assembled superfluities through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the locus where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizations for teeth due to pain, and similar things, and then the pain does not return at all; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And few people understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations work after medicine, and their intentions are false, for when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is well known that cauterization is the latest in medicine, not according to the intention of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizers of gold are more effective than iron ones, and they said this not because of the quality of gold or its high value; and they said that the blisters from a gold cautery do not cause putrefaction, but it is not true, for I have tested it and found that it does happen in some people; and cauterizers of gold are more effective than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you must not leave it when it is hot by the color of the gold, and let it cool quickly; and if you heat it too much, put it in water; and thus there are enough precautions.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins shall be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold in the head, and there are two of them where we treat by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for the multitude of dreams and toothache and throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient must be purged by solutive medicine, changing the nature of the illness for three or four days, according to what the virtue and strength and custom of the ill person can bear; and then remove the head from the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place it crosswise between your hands, and put his hands on soft pillows; after that, put the root of your palm above the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let where your two means come, bleed from there. Then heat the cautery called "olivare," as its form is thus:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do this by slowly lowering and extracting your hand little by little, turning it. Then withdraw your hand entirely, and probe the wound if you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. After that, take a little salt, and put in wet wool, and place it on the wound, and let it remain for three days. Afterwards, apply a moistened cloth with butter; leave it on until the scalding is removed. Finally, treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; therefore, move it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of them said that the cautery must be applied such that part of the bone is burned, and then the burned part of the bone should be removed and cleaned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery should be applied so strongly as to burn a width as large as the ring that women wear in their noses, for this causes the humors to move out. One must keep the wound open long; afterward, one must clean and draw it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of applying the cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except in some cases where there is fear. I believe that I should apply the lesser one; for the shoulder is weakened by continuous natural dislocations, as we testify in other limbs; and even when the patient's shoulder is weak by nature, and the first application of cautery seems more beneficial and less harmful to me, from this I work out this particular benefit.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of old pain from the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When pain in the head is chronic and lasts long, the patient should use medicines for a year and pills called "cochie," and treatments for purging the head and eyes and plasters; and if they are pricked with the cautery as we have previously said, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take heed that the head of the sick person is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize beneath that cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the head down to the bone as we have said before, do the cautery over the vein called "vasselz"; and the vein is where one places the suction cups; and lighten your hand so that you do not go down to the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries for the horns should be finer than those used for the middle part of the head, and this is their form.
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purified by medicinal means, and other treatments have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then he makes cauteries according to two ways, that is to say with medicine ague and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with medicine ague is that you take a clove of garlic, and peel off the skin and part of the outer layer for just two heads. Then place it in the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can insert the garlic clove beneath the scalp; and when it is inserted, hold it tightly and leave it there for twelve hours; then remove it and apply a plaster with butter until it dries up. Leave the wound uncovered for two or three days; then place a cloth soaked in butter over the area.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until he is healed; and if you see, then do those of some burning medicines that I have written or tenth treatise of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery with coal to form it:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the tip is made in the shape of a bell with only a little projection, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly move the iron gently, so that half the thickness of the heart's flesh is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery, which is above, does not burn, and let plenty of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton in readiness of a sieve, and put on the shoulder for three days; then place soft cotton bathed in butter, and thereafter treat the shoulder with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this inflammation with the cautery called "cultellare", do so at its point entirely, and beware of scarring the artery in this inflammation which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of inflammation
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat inflammation as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery and cauterization with iron are insufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot; apply thusly over the painful area a line half a digit long, and withdraw your hand once, ensuring you do not scar the artery and do not reach the bone; beware of the mandible that moves when eating, and let the nerves have regard only to sensation and avoid spasms in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting with great fear and especially those who are not learned and inexperienced; leave the work half done; but I will tell you how one stops bleeding from an artery when it is cut, and I will show you where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two knives; and this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division do not help, then heat this cautery called "poins," as its form is described here:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing all around the affected ear, or in both places where the pain is felt, and then move slightly upwards from the root of the ear after having marked the spot; do ten points around each ear; afterwards cure the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by fire cautery is not of those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply fire cautery to similar cases that come from drying up and decay of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this condition of torture that moves from phlegm in the fluids, purgatives, and gargling, and if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply the cautery just above the top of the ear by a small distance from the tip of the ear, and another along the temple as long as an inch; let the cautery remain there until the middle part of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the cutaneous one that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it should be that the knives are a bit larger; after the cure of the head as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and the patient does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the head, and one on the neck which is called "vassels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and cure them as we have said before.
de litargie	of lithargyrium
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is fitting to give the patient great and purifying yeres and pills for the brain; after cleansing the head of the patient thoroughly, place on the occiput the sinapism plaster as written or treated in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed thus, well and good; and if it is not, perform three cauteries descending from the head down to the neck, with a large space between each cautery. Cure it as for the others, and if you see fit, and the patient suffers, do the third cautery in the middle; and when necessary, two more above the two horns, and cure until it is healed; let the cauteries be called "olive," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of dandruff and of what we have said before; then touch the patient's head, afterward make a fire cautery between the head and on each horn, behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering greatly, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries above the spine of the back; and leave them until the deeper part is burned, then lift your hand; afterward treat the burns until they are healed, and let it be the cautery called "olive" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of dandruff and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patients are great and suffer from cold medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if this is an infant who cannot tolerate the pain, make them gargle and chew with modifications to the brain often using good meats; after placing the head in the middle, and I apply the fire cautery as we have said before, on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, I apply cauteries as I said for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive cauteries be according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, apply the fire cautery with subtlety according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the superfluities or corrupted moisture are thick and large, then apply the fire cautery of such cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities decline to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then he should drink something by which his brain may be cleansed, according to what was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After heating the shoulder of the patient; after making the linen well, as a circle, so place it under the shoulder; and the patient should lie crossed, and be well held from all sides; after presenting the liniment, and value much of butter of barberry ancient; and the heated one by fire tempered, that the dough can on his applying can suffer; after emptying the circle from within under the shoulder, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see cauterization done by making several pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain more; and then put on damp cotton soaked in butter and gelatin grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and cause the patient to drink purifying things for the head, and keep them away from all moisture, and make them sweat or have baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After this, instruct them to bend their head backward, and cauterize through the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of awe is to both eyes together, or in one if the descent is in one. And cover the entire cauterization with all the veins and arteries beneath the heart, making the cauterizations long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood come out, stop it as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision how to handle it; and sometimes one makes a fire cautery or hot iron over the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the heart the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or detract from the arteries that appear at the front of the head; and one sees that they are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes: I cautere over the forehead, two cauteries over the temples, and two cauteries or hot irons over the two rear bones; and if there is more need, I cauterize saignement above the sorcil with all the small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then let the patient drink three nosegays; after that, lance the head, and do a cautery or in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and do two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sorics, a bit below the hairline; and beware of the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil becomes softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you must make two cauteries on the two sinews as long as the evil spirits are; and do not leave the hand aside until the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes turn white and prick the eye, and in such cases cauteries are applied according to two methods: that is, by fire, or with a burning medicinal substance.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then place the patient in good health; after that, draw a figure on the paper of the eye as is like the leaf of the laurel, and let it be the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put moistened cotton in egg white and myrrh on the eye, then heat the cautery as its form is described.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn several times very little at a time, until the eyes are scorched in place; and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the outline of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave thus for three days, after which put moistened cotton in butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come and the paper is softened, then resume the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are thin, cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hair near the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even. Then take parchment and make its shape like the leaf of bay; then take French soap and strong heat, one drachm of each, and grind them well together; and apply it quickly, so that it does not cool, over the form you have made as the shape of the bay leaf, and put eyes on the paper. And if the disease is only in the eye, open only I, and if in both also; and put wet cotton under the eye soaked in egg white; and the patient's head be in a normal position and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press it slightly and the eyelid every time the patient feels the medicine biting, for he feels the bite as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the eyelid and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put the medicine again on the eyelid or where the medicine has not acted, as long as your actions are equal, and your eyes placed steadily; then put a wet cloth with butter on it until the pain is gone, after which cure the eyelid of the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to guard your work well with great care so that the medicine does not stick to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft later, and the hairs prick in the eye, restart the treatment on that side which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the wound heals; and this is the form of the leaf of the myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's eyes are different in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints; and do not always direct the right way to him for whom this art is studied.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your shoulder; and guide the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move and does not shift from its position; afterwards, put moist cotton in the yolk of an egg or in persillion juice over the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is divided: and place it on the head as if forming a pen of a woodpecker, together with which the cautery should be; if you see, make it point from one head to another, and if you see, make it also like a tent; but in any case, what is placed there must move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After this, if the fistula is open, drain the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, work on it, and draw out the bow (likely a term for a foreign body). Afterwards, place the hot cautery in the form of a cone, and hold your hand at the part above the neck under the eye to prevent your hand from doing mischief. Place the cautery in the oil's fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, begin the cautery again once more, and do so as often as you need, and let it be for three days; after that, put on moist cotton with butter, and the treatment of the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, apply a watery corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed; then proceed according to what is in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Hear about the fistula, and make it clean; after that, place in the opening one slender thread of wool:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they do this to the quantity of one penny; and hold your hand or arm firmly, and let not the patient move at all, that the melted plonc does not run into his eye; and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient wet wool in egg white or in ale: the plonc thus heals the fistula and the healthy part with marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, it is necessary to administer pertusin to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in itself.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When the cure for these cracks, as we have said in the divisions, does not help, then heat the small fire cautery knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place it in the cracks until it cools; afterwards, dress the wound with ointment until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or to the eye socket, or palate, or to the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and is matured and becomes a fistula; then cure it as we have said in the divisions, but if it does not help: then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, plug or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cools at the bottom of it, and behind it; and do this one or two times, after the cure as we have said in the treatments until it heals; and if it is cured thus, that is good; and if not, you must expose the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	by movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and if treatment with medicines is ineffective, then put the patient's chief in your healthy one; afterwards, heat the cautery as described later in such a manner that you place a cane on the tooth; and quickly insert the hot cautery into the tooth, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and continue with the cautery as you see fit; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, let it sit for an hour, and then spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and the treatments with medicines are ineffective, then it has need of cautery according to two ways: and cautery of wax and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of wax is such that you take wax from a cow, and melt it at the end of an iron or tin spoon; then take cotton and wrap it at the tip of a tent, and the moistened wax; and place it quickly on the painful tooth, holding until it cools down; and do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see soft wool and cotton in cooled wax, and place it on the painful tooth, and put hot iron on top until the fire reaches the pulp of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery of fire is such that you take one or more iron pins or nails, and let them be large enough that the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, as will be described later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then quickly apply it; this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whichever tooth you want, and according to what you have power to do; this is the form of the pin:
des scrophules	of the scrofulous glands
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulous glands are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery ember from which the form will come, and have two openings for the smoke to escape on the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as necessary until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it for three days; and place moist wax cloth on top until the burning is gone; after that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cantharus:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first evacuated of fluids with solutive medicines; after which perform a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After which perform another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called "clavile" of which we have the form before; and cure it as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cauterization
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the body are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or drying, and the disease is old, then perform two cauteries on the flanks at their sides; and another cautery between the breasts; and let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a fire cautery at the points where the cautery is called "points" of which the form was described earlier in the illness of the ears; and let there be the points up to 30, or around that number.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment of the head as previously described, let there be three fire cauteries according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And since these cautery marks are lighter, because you make three in one application.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After you have treated the patient on their back and side; afterwards, touch the heart within with your left hand at its ribs; and if the dislocation is out of place internally, heat the fire cautery which has two nooses formed.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it perceives pain up to the ribs, and bring together the figure of the cautery with four cauteries; and for this, a cautery with three nooses is made, because the figure of the cauterization consists of three cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery with three nooses.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted over this first nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cauterizer with powdered roots and salt; after this, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens, then cauterize over the thick part of the cautery clave, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach to such an extent as it is contrary to his constitution, and there are many catharrs in him, and by the usual methods of treatment they do not profit, then it must be treated on his back, and he should extend his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I will make three cauteries on the inner side of the foot for the size of a coin, all the cauteries close to the heel, and two further down the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and have space between them so that when they putrefy they do not be joined together; and let the cauteries be perfect so that they penetrate both parts of the heel, and the shape of the cauteries according to this form without alteration:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, cautereze by pricking and bleeding above the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see of inch; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, while it is forced out of its natural temperament due to superfluities; the patients are treated as we have said in divisions, and if they do not profit from it, then the patients must be treated on their side; and mark three cautery marks according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the ribs of man come; and let there be the width of a finger between each cautery mark; and may the cautery marks be as long as one's body, and do not press too much with your hand over the entire cautery mark; and be burned only the halves of the keur, and have the patient lie straight on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is so, cautereze these cauteries of the cuticular, being subtle and skillful in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up all the body; and that it come not to a boil, for the hearts are most delicate there, and the wise ones to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe; and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment heals the membranes, it is necessary that the patient be treated at its source; and then scrape the flesh or abscess, and then heat the cautery which resembles fire, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the fire cautery until the blisters form up to syphacia, until all the pustules are gone; after the cure, as in the treatment of poultices, until it is healed; and it must not be used any more than this cautery by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured at least once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly operate, and always it seems to me that it is better to leave them alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the fire cautery of pleursin.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleursin cautery, one should use roots of angelica, and in this manner: take a long root of angelica, the largest you can find, and let it be dry. Let it be as thick and as long as your thumb; squeeze out the juice into oil, then hold it over the fire, and apply the cautery between the forcele and the neck, and two small ones slightly descending in the part beneath the chin; and two between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclined a little backward; and one at the heel, and another above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the heel below the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but apply it openly as if smelling it.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by some ancient that no man uses the fire cautery in imitation of rasur, and heats it and places it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and then the pain is gone, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one method is that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mouse, as per the shape of the liver cautery we have said before; and do not press your hand on all parts of the cautery, and let the patient often lie on his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the mouse, or where the pain in the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After letting the two inflamed nerves burn until the cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will be four. And if you see, burn all the cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten putrefaction over time, and it is good to change to another of the treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	for dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment is not effective, then you must make four cauterizations around the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus. Let the cauterizations be close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After let the cautery open to drain pus long enough, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be kidney-shaped as shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is mentioned above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in a dropsical person and are full of yellow bile, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and remove your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would burn to a fine ash, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the cuticular; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in between the leg; and leave the cauteries long without curing, as the ash will come out; after that cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the resetting
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution from the belly comes from cold and moisture, as the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by ordinary means; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then make the large cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken of earlier about the stomach cautery, at which the circulatory cautery is used; and four cauteries between the cheekbones underneath each large cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the knife, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are external or internal, and are old, being large cold and moist humors corrupted, if the cure has not been effective as we said in the divisions, then make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that one slightly above the iliac crest, gradually making a triangular pattern, and one cautery below the navel II dobs; and if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and there is swelling of the skin, then make the large cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire length of the cautery; let the cautery remain open long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carbuncle which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the carbuncle, heat the cautery to resemble a razor, and then place it entirely burning on the carbuncle. Let your hand remain there until the vein begins to appear, from which the blood will flow; do this once or twice. If there is much carbuncle, cauterize each part as we have said. Afterward, apply beneficial ointments until it heals. If you cauterize with a large cautery on a carbuncle, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a cut or incision, which we shall discuss in its place, comes such an illness that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is any fistula and is enveniled and filled with rotten moisture, you must probe it entirely with a sharp探针，并确保它穿过整个瘘管。并且你要知道整个探针的长度。
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to a scorching heat, and inserting it into the fistula according to how deep the probe entered, repeat the application of the cautery until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned, one or two or three times as needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these sores, and do not make them worse except in living flesh, and think that it is not personable; after curing the sore until it is healed, and if the flesh is scarred and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the sore is completely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the flesh is tough, and the bones at the root are corrupted; and in such cases as one we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys and is accompanied by great wind, and does not take on a female form, then you must make a cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the clavile cautery as we have already said; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will do greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below on the bladder, where the hairs begin near the knife's edge, both on the right and left. Let each cautery be as long as one inch of our finger; and make a cautery above the spine, or there if you need it. Make the cauteries sharp according to the form previously stated.
de la marris	of the gallbladder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the gallbladder is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the stones are corrupt and their passage is delayed; and when they come, great pain is felt: then it is necessary to make three cauteries between the buttocks, as we have said for the bladder, and two cauteries above the spine; and make the cauteries sharp, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it dislocates from its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the cause is found in the departure of the joint space. Then you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the joint around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have such a cautery, make three cauteries with olive oil, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the joints. Cure him until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the socket of the hip, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is treated as we said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills or other good pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards, you apply the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with medicines that are hot together, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is as follows: you cauterize on the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form, and make them good in depth and large, with an inch of space between each cautery. Let the cauteries be olive-shaped; once done, a single cautery is made in the middle at the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a manner that the circles contain all the hip, and all the parts of the thigh be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then apply two cauteries where the patient says the pain is felt, and above the ankle four inches, a little on the left side; whether the cautery be cutaneous or burn the thickness of the thigh. And if the patient feels the pain extends to two inches or three of the foot or near it, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four points with the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is greater, do more of this; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then apply the cautery with a surgical or circular instrument, and be well careful in all your cauteries that you leave no part of the cautery unburned so as to burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not do greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who applied the cautery to the ankle of the foot and left it on so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were perforated and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly purge from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, apply the cautery to both, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the manner, make such iron and let it be at the head as thick as one nailhead of the thumb, or a bit less, and let it be interwoven and let it be between the interweaves from one interweave just to the other distance the quantity of a knot of an inch; and let the interweaves above two parts, and let them also like peas, and may have the hand of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red and gives off scents, and then place it on the socket of the sick hip, and turn it toward the healthy side; and with the cautery once the heat has been applied, leave it for three days; and then make a plaster with butter, and keep the wound open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery little due to fear of its heat, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, he is a good cautery for those who can bear it, and let it be placed where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cautery in medicine is such that you make the instrument of tongs in which hangs the margin of the tip, and may be made of tin or iron on a long wall, and at its height it has two palms, and each has the quantity of the thickness of one thumb; and they should be open front and back, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their side, place your hand firmly over the hip box; then throw in between the two circles of the hot aw that has been heated by fire just a little, and let it remain for about an hour to several hours, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found to be similar to a bite from a snake; and when the bite has passed, withdraw your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the cauterization is removed; and let it be three days until putrefaction is treated; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, perform the operation gently according to what you have done for the hip increasing it; and this is the manner of the warm application, and I have written about treating the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If it has a small hole that a point of a razor could enter; and place over this one another pot well leaded, and put ashes and chalk and soft awn on top, until there are two of these above the powders you will have thoroughly prepared by hand; and let it be thus until the liquid descends with water and wax or can be leaded, then take all that awn and throw it over the chalk and over the alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very watery and is administered in doses of medical work and in cauteries of other members. For it does as much work as fire, and to other medicines with which one cauterizes well the haunch, as with terebinth and honey, anacardium, chalk with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure for someone who was cured of hip pain and sciatic vein pain, and the good man, and he says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in one time when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says that you should take fresh and dry verdigris, grind it a great deal with a little fat, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and leave it on for three hours and by the quantity so that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is a bit warmed up, and put him to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such a fire cautery with these medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheeps' wool, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the depression between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards, take dry sheeps' wool and heat it on fire until it becomes coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is extinguished; and do this again, and continue in this manner until you think by sense that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased; and this way of cauterization is called "sheeps' wool cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back through falling or percussion or through excessive bloodletting or through similar spread of cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cautery, though it may be necessary for those caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After this, if the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar conditions, make three lines signed with enche on the back where the pain resides, and in each line use five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can tolerate; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes upon small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight throat when they rise, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and find it cured, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So cauterize each part of the spine thoroughly and evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, cauterize between the spines with a sharp fire cautery for two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treat the limb until it is healed according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply a fire cautery in flesh where there is a space near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain from the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain from the joints is due to moisture spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes from the feet, which the physicians call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by treatments or medicines, it is treated with cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick the face of the foot, let the cautery be at the entire cautery where we claim "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, let the cautery be applied to each knee three or four times from each part, with the entire cautery being olive oil; and if you have need of more, then do more, but keep your hand away only as much as the coals of the fire are hot.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, then apply the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks along the flax two lines; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and gentle medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and purge the humor, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the side
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture comes in organs, and the bowels descend to the coccyx and it is newly occurring, then it must be that when you see him treated, he should not eat any of that day; and if he uses things that empty his stomach, so that the fumes descend from his stomach; after this, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his buttocks until the bowels are repaired, and draw them with your fingers, and sign under the rupture over the bone of the thigh, and make a mark that be like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and emits scents.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then draw the bowels back to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return. Work well on the thighs of the patient, and set a cushion and a soldier under the thighs, and another under the foot which holds his hands. Then place the cautery over the mark with your whole hand, and keep it straight until you reach the bone. If you do not reach the bone the first time, repeat again until you come to the bone. Be subtle that the bowels do not protrude when you make the cautery; so as not to burn them, and that the patient does not die or other harm occurs.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you cannot reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the cauteries for children are subtle according to the size of their body, and those for adults as large according to their measure; after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards, apply other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient rest on his back for forty days until the wound is well sewn up; and it must be that its nursing is prolonged, so that the boils do not burst when he is taken into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage, and let it rest for another forty days; have good rest, letting him work little and guarding against excessive intake of food and drink, and raising his voice too high; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment to cut in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not increase further, then let them be seared with the cautery according to their quantity, and let it be burned at one-third of the core; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should sear it with a cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the head of the wound with a sign and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and guide your cautery through both lines.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its size and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is effective, that is well; but if not, you must repeat the other cauterization over it, for it is customary that the pain should move to the nearest part of the limb, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	of leeches
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Leeches are sometimes aided by cauterization with great help, especially for diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you can see the cauterization, take care that the disease is in the beginning, and it is cured as we have said in the division, and does not worsen or linger. And if you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make V cauteries on the head: I place one at the top of the head near the crown, and another towards the front at the end of the hairline; II on the two horns (temples), and III behind on the occiput. Let your hand remain until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs fall off so that the vapors from the gross humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse (nape of the neck) according to what is described above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it appears clearly, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery on the nose, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large on the breast and another opposite, and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are behind the last heel, do not burn them; and at no time make a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cautery, the more you do help, and it profits them; and know that the sick do not feel pain at the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you will find in the manner of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, apply a dressing of flour with honey and other dressings until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauteries penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin; then dress with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes the cautery is done by hand and with a stick or on the back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and in any case, do not perform it if one is not knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of calluses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is fully developed, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterize with a cautery slightly strong, according to the thickness of the skin, until the blanchor is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of wheat and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from colt and almond, one part of each; mix them all together, and apply with a cloth, and keep at the site until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cauterization treatment for a chancre
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre begins to appear, and you see it stopping, cauterize with a circular cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the surgeons said that one should make a cautery also at the middle of the ulcer; and in all cases this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen more than once; and it is a better thing for it to be cauterized between, with the cautery called "circle," as we said when speaking of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it is slow to heal due to its excessiveness or the oldness of the patient (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see that it should be hastened to heal: then cauterize around a lot of small cautery marks by pricking; after which let it remain thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Car she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it from above in such a way that the course of putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a corruption of the member, for it eats away at the limbs as fire does to dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a patient who can endure cautery with all fire, then heat the fire cauteries very little and much, according to what is suitable for the patient or where the disease is; after cauterizing from all sides until you erradicate all the corruption, and let nothing remain of it, that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and place sore-wrapping with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the application of ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, that is good; and if it does not, then restart the cauterization on what remains dislocated from the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture has sometimes been cured with aqueous medicine instead of the fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the aqueous medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of corns that come from the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from the feet, through corns, a disease arises called "clous" according to our understanding, and it is a large, hard thing that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, the fire cautery, and the cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the cautery feather as one would a Gothic pen quill, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can hold the nail in all parts, and that there be subtle margins; after this, put it hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the tip of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to fester with putrefaction; then make a plaster of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the plaster all night, and the nails will fall out and be uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then anoint the limb with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire on the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, you must apply a hot cautery to it; and it is done in this manner: take a sparrow’s nest or iron rod, or a Gothic pen quill, and place it over the nail and the althelia (which are used for verrucas); then put the rod on so that it penetrates all around, and pour a little hot water onto it, and hold your hand well, pressing with your hand as you turn it so that the margin of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water deep path to the roots; and allow the patient to endure a bit the scalding from the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself completely from its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you dry all that is in the body, then treat the wounds that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	treat the shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or other fevers, it is fitting that you make four or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one at the head, and one on the stomach with the olive cautery; if this stops the trembling, and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times apparent by inspection of the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from large corrupt matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary at the first sign that a cauterization be done on each head of the pustule: a fine fire cautery from juniper wood, whose points are heated by fire, or from long aromatic root, or with a lentile-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow into large tumors, but the superfluous parts that cause them are cut off, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut during the wound, or incision of the abscess, or with the cauterization of the member, and similar things; and it is a most grievous thing to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more drips out; then put the olive fire cauteries, both small and large, over the fire until they are all red hot; then take one, whether large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are still hot, so take one of the other cauteries quickly which are over the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is coagulated; and watch that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well coagulated by itself when the artery is large, unless it is done through one of the four methods we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to coagulate blood; and let it be tied and held firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who administers astringent treatments with tightly wrapped cloths or places burning things there, or other similar things, if it does not help much, then do not proceed.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no sight or medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it well so that it is constricted above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but rub the palm with cold water frequently until it is very cold, so that the blood is frozen and thickened and constricted; and then proceed to cauterize and medicate as needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter where fire cautery or cautery from burning medicine is necessary for all diseases, and the ointments and their causes and instruments and forms of cauterization; and I have placed that chapter from head to feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way because one finds more easily what one wishes.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And since I begin this one, you must, dear friend, know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on fire cautery, and because of this, it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come for treatments in various ways.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come in such a state that their illness has weakened them so much that they die lightly from the severity of their disease, and from the greatness of their wickedness; one must have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these, there are those who give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you in this manner. But place more careful consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not offer rashly but wisely of what you are certain and have tested. And use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients for their health; and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May our Lord give you good understanding and justice, and if you wish to receive the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by discussing it section by section, as in the chapter on fire cautery, which I previously discussed from the head down to the feet, because you find it easier to understand what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head filled with fluid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the bails hold too tightly the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from the reason given that no one knows.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and among all those I have seen, death hastened; for this reason, it seems to me that it would be best to abandon the work in partial treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen the child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head grew larger each day to the point it could no longer bear it; and so much moisture gathered beneath the bone at the syphac, between the skull and the bone; and the operations must be such that if there is moisture between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a wide slit in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, as far as the moisture extends; and see here the form of the syphac.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the face open on each side, and a hard lump jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond: then you must make three cuts in the forehead according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture outwards.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After binding the cuts with cloth and powder, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days; then remove the bindings, treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and allow the forehead to heal evenly. Then give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look for the center of the abscess and the collection of pus; for it is sometimes in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Mark then where the abscess is centered, and the filling of the pus, and make the cut according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and watch for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a person has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the testicle, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is the cautery with those where they will cauterize the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the veins pop out, the patient should turn their head; after which, rub the neck with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then squeeze the patient's neck around the entire cloth; then observe where the vein lies, and the joints of both sides are behind the ears, and slightly raised; then mark the joints with a pen, then cut each one from an acute spatula blade in two parts, so that the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done by the side of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, place the spatula blade over the artery and cut above it, cutting as twice through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to touch, you must measure the length of a thumb's breadth three times, then prick with an awl and cut just to the bone; the amount of blood that should be let out is six cents, and by chance perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of syphilis, apply the salve we used for abscesses, and let it not fester, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	From the vein.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old vein disease comes, and acute cataract, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and ancient scarred fever and similar things, and these are treated with methods of medicinal treatments, yet none of this benefits them, then extract the arteries in the temples and apply cauterizations, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them so is that the patient makes behind the hairs of his temples, and hears the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is little responsive outside except in some very cold persons; and if it is responsive, the patient draws his neck with some strings, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and wipes the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatillum of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then brand the skin lightly until you see the artery, then draw it upward with the forceps, and remove well the threads beneath each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the point of the needle, then cut from that part according to the quantity of two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will never heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw off blood from the VIth vein, just to the IIIrd; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two loops of a double strong silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the sudden opening of the wound, and hemorrhage; then cut the excess between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the cutellaire cautery to the bone as long as the shoulder is cut; and this is the major work, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauteries are helpful to finish the moistures; for they are of greater help to the moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the arm with old cotton and place a well-made bandage over it; when you release them, they should be treated with dry medicines that produce flesh and bandages until they are healed; and if there is no cloth from the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten by cauterization, or fill the arm with vitriol cloth and squeeze it with your hand so that the blood congeals; and if you do not have this present, place your thumb over the cloth until the blood congeals, and rinse the cloth with cold water until the blood stops, and hold it as needed; what is more moist and lighter in the extraction of the artery should be cauterized at the vein from this cutting cautery divided into two parts, but the cuts should be well thick to ward off their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too cold, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be a piece of ginger between the two knives, and then when you have signed the edges of the two lips, and you place the hot iron until it comes just to the bone, cut the vein in two lips; and keep them apart between the two heads because they are not entirely sealed by this cautery from start to finish; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are above the test of the head, and applying any medical treatment does not help, you see the face of the patient become flushed, and feel or observe tremors on the forehead; and the eyes are cold and moist to such an extent that even paper hair falls out, and the papers become heated and scorched by the warmth of the tears, so it must have this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it "bruise cure," and you should do this for a patient who has this illness: if he has hair on his forehead, make three equal incisions along the length of the forehead; let one incision be as deep as two nails going down to the bone, and the others two above the muscles on both sides, but beware not to cut the arteries that are on both sides above the muscles; keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jawbones, and each wound should be about the size of three nails crossing over; have a piece of sponge and much linen ready for wiping the blood, then apply the sharp spatumile from either side as shown.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is from the temple to the second incision; and scorch all the flesh which is above the bone between the two cuts. Then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove the spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert into the first incision the instrument called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is rough, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the scalpel cutting edge towards the buttock side of the wound, and the rough edge towards the bone, and continue inserting it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And scoop out all the vessels that descend to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to what opens at the buttock side, and then do the same in the middle incision down to the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, press out the wound for the blood taken; then place a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put wet cloths in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not form; and on the third day remove the bandages, and apply a large dressing with warm water, then cure with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other wound treatments until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of eye pain
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone frequently comes down with a severe catarrh, and you see the eyes turned inward and small, and a weakening of vision, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and there is a pain akin to water in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the place where they are, it is here.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you instruct the patient to lie on their back behind their forehead, then make a large incision between the forehead, and another slightly wider one.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the left temple incision to the right temple incision, and let the incisions go until the bone is exposed; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with eating. When the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two edges of the incision and place old cotton, and linen; then cover with moistened cloth in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a manner thus: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of calamine, and make a plaster from them; and apply it to the wounds to draw out flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or ore or similar things such as iron; or seed, such as wheat, beans, peas; or flowing substances such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear as a stone or some other substance that does not attach to the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or silk oil, then administer its extraction; and let the patient expectorate with ease, and plug the nostrils when expectoration comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes out in this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer its extraction with fine forceps, of which the form is described here.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the forceps, that is good; but if not, administer extraction with a delicate oncine of small size; and if it does not come out with this, make an ear spica and insert the head of the spica or hole in the ear firmly, and plug what is around the spica with soft wax so that the liquid cannot enter with the spica; then draw it out forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take glue, dip the tweezers into it, and put any instrument that is sharp for this purpose. Then place a bit of cotton inside; afterwards press the glue over the stone or whatever it may be, and draw it out forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not burst from all these things that we have said, you must quickly cut the ear as with an abscessed, hot, and painful one; and spasm. The manner of cutting is that you first apply a cautery to the patient's head, and draw out the blood according to its measure of virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and let the cut be as round as the moon until you reach the stone, then extract it according to your power, and suck it quickly with your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is enclosed and swollen, administer the extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the small spatule according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine tongs and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the earwax that falls into the ear, the patient should use nose blowing to clear the first conditions, and clean the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the wax is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it falls out forcefully through that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If this is not the case, take many stones according to the length of your strong tendons, and warm them slightly in fire; then put one or several of the patient's earwax into the wound, and cut on the outside of his foot from another side, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this from stone to stone until the pus is all gone, and then she will be all gone; and if you see, take a rush, and put one of the heads into the ear, and the other head near fire until the softer rush is burned; then do it with other rushes as we said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, as a flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size and can be felt, administer the extraction with forceps; and this is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if there are no apparent worms, you draw them out with fine forceps, and if they do not appear, you take the wire of which this is formed.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow inside and wide outside.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the finest needle into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, then gradually push the wire completely through; do this often until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, plug the inside of the wire with cotton as I have said for the stone; and if they do not emerge forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the incision of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and you should distill your eyes and medicines into the ear through this instrument, as shown by its form.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be made of silver or lead thin over the small ports, and above the outlet to distil; and for pressing within the distillation use a well-made tool of lead for this purpose, and if you choose to use a razor and envelop the tip with suitable cotton; then throw your eye or your juice, and what you wish of your medicines into the cannel, and let the cannel be in the ear; then pour inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or movement from the ear; and let the medicine sense the malady within, and let the distillations be a little heated on the fire as one distils into the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicines would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men due to a wound stopping up, or flesh growing inside the ear, and these stoppages come sometimes completely blocked in the ear, so one cannot see them; and sometimes just a small part of the perforation closes, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes completely blocked, so one cannot see it, is of great concern for proper treatment, and in such cases where you can see, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, then the work has almost completed as described.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be hot and cutting both in front and behind entirely clean, so that it does not blister the ear; if the purgation is of living flesh or a part of the ear, hold it with fine forceps, and remove it gently, until all that flesh is completely taken out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the purgation is performed in the ear, take the fine scissors lightly and heat them a little with fire, then place them on the part of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the purgation from which the patient feels pain in the ear, prick it gently, and make sure you do not damage the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a wick according to the width of the puncture, and soak it in Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day while the wound is healing, or take a tent and fat in rose-colored water, and powder over ground vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, it must be treated with the tent and move another moistened tent made from rose oil and wax until the swelling is gone; then treat until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bloodletting comes, plunge a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments which remove the flow of blood that are or treat by distillation.
de la char des papieres	from the juice of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and are dry, it must be that you extend them with tongs and forceps, and the decoction of a spoonful of its roots; then put on the head ground vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortic peace, one cauterizes with the subtle lentile cautery, and the cauterer after incision moves; many times they return, since no thing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times in the eyes come things like gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of moisture large on the paper above and below; the work is such: observe if the hail moves from one part to another, and that is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then burn each part lightly, then take it with tongs, and apply it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot change it without piercing a little the paper, it does not grieve the patient; and if the tear is large, sew it up with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force much, for the ointments restore it quickly and promote flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the stone is descending into the inner ear toward the upper part, pour out the paper, and place the stone with tongs, and turn it from one side to another; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not grieve the patient; and when the stone is removed, wash the eye with salt water, and cure the area until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is embedded in the membranes of the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and greatly affects their eyes. They often have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; for this reason, they lie on their faces, sleeping with them down, and are covered by their damp papers that swell and hide from the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the head between your hands and feel the exinach within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is as follows: the patient places their head on your lap; then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach that each part contains. Then place it over them; press with both hands from one side and the other, so that the exinach is gathered within the circle. Then make a slit through the moist area, cutting a crack wide enough, but not larger than the incision made in the healthy vein; and scrape the skin thoroughly until you see the exinach. And through many such preparations, exinach comes out from the slit, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the wound with one piece of linen cloth between your hands; turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is separated; take care not to widen the incision, so that you do not reach all the way to the socket near the eye, and do not damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extraction does not open at the beginning of the incision, widen the incision slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then apply moist cloths and water, and place on the wound, and extract with gauze.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men who grind grain and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an hot abscess comes to its head, apply the cure of plasters soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When on papers hairs grow other than their nature, and they are matured, they harm the eyes, and bring about conditions like habitual tearing, softening of the papers, and albugine, to such an extent that it is a cause of eye destruction; and the cure according to four methods: either by fire cautery together with heat, or by aqueous medicine as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cains, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the eye of the patient in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from the oil side to your left hand; if it changes color, that is good; if not, put a needle along the entire length of the thread above; and let this be between the margin of the paper or where the additional hairs grow among these hairs, and draw the thread across the paper, then cut it flatly. Then make a slit in the part beneath the paper, beneath the added hairs, to the spatumile completely, from the large tearer until the small one; then remove the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and flannel under the paper, then apply a figure of enche above the paper, like the leaf of myrtle, and always ensure that the figure is according to the quantity you wish to lift from the paper which is divided for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs much of the paper according to how the paper has been softened; then make on all the surface between the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large lacrimal gland until small; let it be one of the cracks near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour an ounce at one of the two corners of the cheek, then scorch all of it; then join the two lips with a stitch using a fine needle throughout the entire thread of thin wool, and wipe away the blood, and do away with the excess threads on both sides of the sorcery to any gluey things, if you wish to do this; and if not, do not care about it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitches using drying and constraining things, because the paper revives suddenly from the wound and their joining, but the stitching is worn (as the ancients say), and these are works without fear; and in another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as like the leaf of laurel, as we have recounted, sized at three inches according to the form which is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply those which surpass the small forces equally according to the form which is given here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or have thread, and put one end of the thread through the figure; and place the other thread next to the large artery, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally; then remove your hand equally, and remove all the skin above which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suturing, and treat until it is healed; and if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar healing ointment; and any time the hair of the paper is reversed: you must use what we said about the incision; but the suturing in both places is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of cankers is as follows: and it is that you fold the paper and cut an opening inside according to what I have said, and then make two canker rods by art, and two thin threads also long as the paper and the width of the space between your fingers; and hold the heads of the two parts where you will hold the strings; then join one and the other subtly above that which rises from the eye of the paper, and pull the two cankers from both sides; and let it be so for some days, and the skin which was constrained shall die and nerve and fall off, until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays healing, and if it grows strong, then continue the treatment until it is healed; and when the wound has healed, and the paper is lifted, and no hair will grow anymore; and this is the form of the two cankers that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you insert a thin needle, and you thread the fine silk thread through it; then assemble the heads and tie them together carefully, so that the lengths of the threads make up one palm's length; then arrange another fine silk thread in the chase, and tie its head to the other thread; then place the patient's head on your healthy side; and keep away from the sun so that the operations become clear, for it is a subtle and small operation. Then insert the needle completely into the root of the added hair, and make it pierce through the banner paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair if there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out through the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not grow with it, you shall draw the chase out through all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase seems to be fully drawn out from above and that you see it by the sight of the eye; then you shall draw the chase and the thread, and close the wound for two or three days, until the hairs soften in their place and flesh grows over; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair of natural hair, and let it be removed with that or where you leave it, until it is elongated and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the putrefaction of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or putrefaction, comes to the oil, it does so in two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a fire cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut the sutures, and分开其边缘，然后放入亚麻布绷带，并且等到它愈合后再移除；在治疗中不应使用干燥和收缩性的东西。
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first; but use substances that soften, such as fenugreek; and wash with water or urine and boiled linseed, and ointments of clarified butter in any of the eyes, and wrap it in a cloth, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not heal entirely according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are only for addressing the disease so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds, splits, cauteries, and similar things; and the way of the work is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and fix it into the flesh, and make the thread pierce from left to right so that the threads come out at both heads of the flesh; then place the flesh above all on the needle, and the cloth over the spatumile wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the crack, turn the paper, and make two cracks inside the paper; and let the heads of the two cracks be at the angles of your incision, and make an angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is also like the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche"; then remove the flesh according to the quantity that its sides have over, from what follows the paper, then join the separated parts with a thread of wool; then apply the cure as we said for mollifying medicines and tents until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a crack or stitch or cautery, you must make a full crack below the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said before; then separate between the two flaps of a tent as I have said; and one should perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is much diverse in form. The master surgeons devise any means possible so that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what needs to be done and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this sewing occurs in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is hardened with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it must be that you insert the point of a needle beneath the paper and pull it up; and stretch it with forceps until you cut what is aerated at the subtil spatumile, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting so that the patient cannot bear that the spatumile too sharp bleaches the eye; and make your incision, which you burn together, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all this assembly is healed, and never causes ailing in an aqueous saline substance, or from anger; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye moistened wool soaked in plenty of egg; and after three days use binding and other soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nail of the eye is according to two manners: it is nervous and similar to a hard membrane, and another which is not nervous but is similar to white congealed moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and tends it properly with scissors, one cannot see; and both resemble starting near the large lacrimal gland, and grow little by little until they cover all vision and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of incision is as follows: the patient places their head in your hand, then closes their eyes. You lift the paper with your hand, then clip the nail with small-pointed scissors and hold it above. Then take a needle, and insert the horsehair, or oxhair, or beef hair, and a strong thread; and slightly double the point of the needle and push it through the nail, piercing it completely with the entire needle. Hold the nail with the thread and position it above, and scrape along the side of the nail where the groove and silk meet to the tip of the hair up to the head. Then cut away the remainder at the root of the lacrimal gland with all subtle force, leaving the natural skin or lacrimal gland, so that the incision does not cause the body to weep accustomed tears; and sometimes you hold the nail only on a pinch and on the thread as we have said; then scrape it along the entire subtil spatumile (a small canal) where its form is.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatule does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the probe is not perforated; and after incision pour in the eye a little sieved salt, and from the collar made of litharge, and let it be until the next day; then cure with that which he needs until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the forceps cannot enter it, often this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it copulate, work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatule light and slightly sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And scrape the nail gently from above, and if you see that it thins at all and the rationale presses on it, distill from your mouth into the eye a collar of litharge and a red collar and sieved salt, and stop up the eye until the next day; then restart the other work according to this same operation until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against it in the eye, such as an abscess, then let it be, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the gland causes great harm to the eye, suspend it by an oncine, and remove a part but not all, so that no tears arise; then distill in the eye red powder made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that arises around the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men's eyes grow red flesh once, and cover the pupil, restrain it on papers and turn it upside down, seeming like a water lily; and the work is that the patient places their head on your side, then manipulate the eyes, and remove all that flesh with suitable oncines, and suspend it by force; then scrape off the first layer of flesh, continuing to shave until you reach the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the work. For the incision of the spatumile as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small forces one removes the sebel, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all flesh is removed, apply brine oil or distill red powder and similar corrosive medicines, and place a swab upside down over the eye. If nothing remains and the wound heals without an abscess, if you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that calm a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and in this way remove any new flesh that appears in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But still it must be that you adjust the treatment of each weak eye from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, and affect vision and weaken the eye for all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you must do is to examine whether the eye itself is red and clear, and there is no other disease besides the redness; then handle it in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy hand, and suspend those veins for one inch according to your wisdom, and let the inches be doubled carefully according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be one ounce by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the veins subtly and wipe the blood an hour after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and guard that you do not scar the eye with the points of the forceps, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be most fervent in your work so that you do not harm any vein; and when you have done this, distill in the eye a cologne of green and red to corrupt what is left of the swelling.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to coil all of those in that hour, apply a poultice to the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and assured of the warm abscess, then resume according to this method which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the veins.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire [fistula] is called "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and with hot aqueous medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then indeed in it you make a cut above the abscess, let it die where it should, and draw out all the moisture that it has, until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is revealed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove it with all the instrument of which this is the form; and it is called "asper chief," and it should be made from iron to the head round, and should be pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the head of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that this corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the head of medicinal drying substances.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is sewed, and flesh arises, and the core of the bone is sewed, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew or is not abscessed, and bad accidents do not occur, know that it is healed; if this is not so, there is no other means than to bring the fistula to the hole of the vein according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with wet medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the awl according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the handle be attenuated just to the tip as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the socket of the shoulder, and keep your hand away from the eye for a little while, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the pain if he keeps his hand near his nose; and then restore the joint with medicines dry as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the joints, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are completely open, and there is no further discharge or reduction, it is necessary to bind the patient. Then, treat the wound, and place cups or hasterels over the eye without piercing for suction. Afterward, apply a paste of myrrh and aloes and incense and sarcocol at the site. Then, keep the eye bound with bandages and cloths; the method for the cloths is to use sufficiently soft cloths, double each one four times, and place them one on top of another according to the amount needed. Then, cover from above with a hard form cloth, and reapply cups for suction without piercing. Remove the cups and allow the eye to be bound day and night; if the ligature becomes soft, you must apply it much tighter. After removing the ligature at day and night, if you see the eye healing, it is good. If not, continue applying the paste, cloths, ligatures, and cups until fully healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the tearing of woollen cloth or skin
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woollen cloth or skin, then opened, and come forth like the grain of resin, and is shocking to see; when you see it copered, the works are such that you pierce a needle into the root of the part beneath until above, then pierce another needle where there be double thread from the part of the suture. And make the piercing, and let the first needle according to its disposition; then cut the leu of the double thread and tie a part of the eye around it, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and put on the eye a cloth moistened in abundance of egg; and let it be until the threads break with the eye, then treat the eye with things that comfort as long as the wound is healed; and at no time restrain the wound from every part of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a great appearance, pierce them with a sharp needle that comes from the inner part of the eye, and drain the moisture and descend the eyes, and let them enter soon; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not due to water that assembles in the eye, seeming like descending water, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you cause the patient to sit on a seat prepared and straight, then take the head between your hands from one side, and move the eyelid until you see the bow come above your eyes; then it should be pierced, and does not descend and removes the light, and see the patient the things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descents of the bow do not appear as we have said, it is.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	if you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut on the corneal membrane gently along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, as much as the bow comes out; and when it has come out, distill into the eye with warm water mixed with honey, or boiled fenugreek water and honey, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearances of the eye's waters in the division, and what needs to be pierced; work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It must be that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the sunlight, and fix the healthy eye very tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if they are right-handed; then take with your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda," or with your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a hair in that part of the black part of the eye where the minor lacrimal duct is, and push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand so that it pierces through the black part of the eye, feeling that almagda reaches the empty place; and the measure of the way almagda should be is exactly in proportion to the space from the prunelle to the end of the noirour; and this is the crown of the eye; you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then put the instrument where the water is, and express it through another way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the liquid flows now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a short time, and if the liquid rises again by the second vein, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, extract it gently by turning your hand little by little; then put a bit of silk thread around it, and remove this from his eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put cotton or moistened wool in oil and abundant egg, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those of our time, place on it a compress with abundant egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it hardens to the extent that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which the form is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it fine, then pour in the hardened substance as we have said; and for the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a sleeping position in the dark; and let him be free from all movements, and give light meals, and move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then release him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and have him show some things, and then rebind him until seven days; and it is not fitting that you do this during or after incision now, but you must loosen it, because the liquid rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If abscesses arise, you release the eye before the seventh day, and follow the treatment for one who alleviates an abscess; and when it is pacified, you release the vision and place upon its edge a small cover to protect any day, and let it be attached in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then let it out of the house little by little, and let it heal in its own way; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came to us who were from the Vercelli region, who told us that in their country they made almagda punctum, to which one applied water, but truly I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, because he who does not know them will see them; and they be properly of arsenic.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the cheek below the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes cheeks below the nose appear swollen, of which some resemble scorpions with claw marks; and there are those where the cheek has a deep-colored mark from a bite, and where the cheek has a well-colored sore.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those sores that are not deep, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun; work on his nostrils, and sprinkle an ounce on those sores, and draw them out. Then cover what you can bear with a very fine sharp spatumile from one side, until you know that the sore is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that cannot be coped, open it with all subtlety and lightly with the instruments, so that nothing remains; and if without surmounts or malignant abscesses occur, give him such help as is proper; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is exhausted and all the flesh be removed, then throw out oil easy and aigle or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the oil works and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is cured; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh on the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach for cutting: then you must put a slightly thick thread of linen, and knot it by hand well, with each knot about an inch or less apart; and place the patient's head where the thread comes out into his nose as far as possible, and draw out odorant until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times do so for children at school, and this is a light matter for him who knows how to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them alternately ensuring they are as we say.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it so that you know the nerve has rotted that tissue, then pull the thread, wipe the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian salve, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the salves have corroded all that remains of the tissue; and then put a quince stick in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the brain, into which one distils the oils and medicines or honey.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And may it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a quince stick, and lead it there; and if you see, make a closed stick, and let the instruments be full to purge the brain; and have one hand on the brain to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the head over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	many times a disease arises in the head over the nose which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large there; and when it is visible to look at; and because of this you must cut in the beginning, and remove all of it, then put on it the cautery or the burning medicine; and if one delays cutting until it becomes large, one must beware if it is hard, of a fugitive color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron at all for it is an embedded abscess; for when one cuts it even once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from pus contact, not of a fugitive color, and you can see that one can cut it all out, empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure it with things drying and constricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilages in the work, it profits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you must see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two edges with a stitch, and cure it until it heals. And if the edges are dry on both sides, you must cauterize all parts of their core until they heal, then join the two edges with a stitch, bind it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder, and powdered incense; and place over the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another healing plaster, and let it remain until it dries by itself, then cure it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in stitching the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	By hand, abscesses in the lips become hard, resembling grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; then it is necessary to turn the lips, incise each side, and remove the contents with forceps, cleaning each part; subsequently apply oil after the vitriol incision, until the blood is thoroughly cleansed; and then apply balsam, and treat the oil with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a sore develops on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold it with tongs and cut at its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow; then place on the head vitriolated powder, or other contracting and drying powders; and if this sore returns after incision, many times occurring, so cut again the second time, and cauterize: it will not return after the cauterization; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are assembled on the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, escorces that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and worms, as much as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must place the patient's head in your hands, and his chin on your knee, and root out the teeth or escorces that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus deal with the blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other stains, until they are all removed; and if what is said for the first reason is gone, it is good; if not, begin again from the second day and the third, until you have rooted out everything; and know that the teeth need various forms of instruments to be rooted out, according to what the work shows, because the rasers used to root out teeth have other shapes than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the tooth in its pain, you should delay the extraction as much as possible, for it must not be done at all if one can help it; for it is a very precious substance until such time that there is no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to extract, it must be that you are certain of the tooth causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain afflicts the patient, and he thinks it is from a sound tooth, and has the good tooth extracted; and yet, all the while, the pain does not depart because the bad tooth was not removed. For we have already wanted to do this for these gentlemen. And when you are well certain of the tooth causing pain, it must be that you burn around the tooth with a very hot iron to protect the gum from all sides; then shake it with your fingers or with fine tongs at first bit by bit, until it is well loosened, then firmly set the tongs; and place the head of the patient on your knee between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After drawing the tooth without breaking it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and put it in each part lightly, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it must be filled with wads of cloth, or the holes are to be closed; and you should gently extract it with forceps so as not to break it during extraction; and you must carefully work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part of it, as this can cause the patient greater pain than the initial one due to the malice of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act thus as the ignorant physicians do, who by their haste and rashness break sometimes the marrow, and do not bring to it what we have recounted; but they cause to come again certain diseases through the roots that remain, or through the marrow that they break, as we often will; and when the bone is drawn out, wash the wound with wine or ale and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply the wound with vitriol powder; and if this does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments to which one must apply when pulling teeth should be long-pointed and have thick handles, so that they do not double when you are extracting the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs such that they do not bend in the stretching, and made of iron well forged, and with teeth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during stretching, you must place wet cotton soaked in butter on the shoulder for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the shoulder is softened, then remove the clamps called "algefri," from which the head appears like a bird's beak; and let them be made internally as a file, and that is their form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out through all these clamps, you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a palanche, and that is its form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if it does break at this point, that is good; otherwise, aid with all the instruments, which forms are mentioned later.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if aid is needed from this instrument that has two handles, which is the form of it:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front by reason of the teeth, and from this instrument which seems like large forceps, of which is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be firm so that they do not break. Know that there are many instruments for the teeth; and also other instruments, which are not counted. And the master surgeons, through their subtlety, find their own instrument, according to what their work and the disease show them. For there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach any instruments because of the diversity of bones. If they break at all during the operation or other bones, then one searches for the appropriate instruments, as I have said, and aids with gestures, which is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore the head with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, remove it with all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural order, and the shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know whether the tooth was born out of place and cannot be set or filed: then pull it; and if it is decayed with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is described, and which resembles a small beak, and let it be made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And file it little by little in your hand each day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that you can file it, then file it with a small file as described.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the lime with which needles are made; and on the tooth, file a little at a time in your hands gently, so that it does not move until it sharpens; then in the end shave it flat for any filed cutter, and if the tooth becomes too sharp and blunts the tongue, then you must file away its harshness until it is equal, so that it does not blunt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth chatter
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth chatter due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot hold down what they are eating so they defecate, you should treat them with constricting medicines, but this is not effective; so you must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never changes. Choose a thread that is neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to adjust the teeth, take the thread and bend it double between two healthy teeth, then place the heads of the needles between the medium-sized teeth, whether one or more, until you clearly reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the treatment up to the part where you started, and withdraw your hand skillfully and carefully, so that it does not move at all; and secure the thread at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the head of the tooth with forceps and assemble them, and pin them between the healthy teeth, and place them such that they do not irritate the tongue; and then leave them so tight as they can remain, and if it loosens or the threads break, you must tighten them with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for all its duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment figure of the two healthy teeth and the two mesial incisors, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, one must put it back in its place, frequently as we have said; and one should not intervene with someone who is not skilled and suffering, and once the form of an osseous bovine tooth is made, it is placed in the spot where the tooth is missing, and it is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	none of these wounds come from the tongue by nature or any other way; they occur either by accident in a stitched wound; and the works are such that you work the mouth of the patient, have his head on your knee, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous ligament broadly until the tongue is dislocated from its place; and if there is hardness or knotting, which is due to sudden injury, you use a lancet and cut broadly that ligament; and guard that the wound not be too perfect, for the artery is beneath; and when done, lift the head with rosewater and alum, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen tent; and let the patient rest each night so that the leeches cannot suck.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the bleeding continues, place vitriol powder on the wound; and if the blood stops, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other salves until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of a red, black, or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is turning white and there is moisture, throw in a pinch, and cut a fine incision with a lancet, and drain from both sides; and if the blood stops during your work, place vitriol powder until it is healed, then return to your work until you have done everything; then remove the flax and salt, and treat with other salves until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are swellings in the throat called "godath," and these are properly known as the two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are hard abscesses of small size and flesh-colored, be careful not to touch them with iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron at all, nor for the discharge of blood; but leave them until they are ripe, and then you may cut them out, or they would break open on their own. And if they are white in color and the root is fine, have your instrument ready to extract them, but first make sure that the abscess is warm, settled, and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then cause the patient to sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your care, and let him open his mouth and have the sergeant's hand between his hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be of silver or of thin tin as of a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take an ounce and stick it in the almond, and draw force above more than you can; and draw nothing from the threads with it, then cover the instrument, of which this is the form, that resembles strong forces; and whatever the heads are curved, one next to the other, and are very sharp, and made of iron ind or of antinne.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs, of which the form is:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side, and on the other side named; and when you have incised one of the almonds, incise the other in the same manner. After the incision, gargle the patient with hot, clear water, or with warm and easy-to-swallow water, and if there is a discharge of blood, gargle the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate peel, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the blood has stopped flowing; then cure the wound when it is healed. And if other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, incise them in the same manner as the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had developed in her throat, that is to say the small abscess; and almost entirely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the conduit being blocked, and neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had to be incised through both openings of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then quickly, and incised the oncine in one opening, then pulled out a large portion of the bowels; then made another cut in the other neck opening, and cleared her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I incised the abscess again, and filled it with coagulated blood, and only a little blood came out; thus, the passage in the throat was destupeied for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued cutting at this abscess for a long time; the abscess kept reoccurring and filling the space that I had cleared until it became very large; then I bandaged it and cauterized inside the throat: thus, it did not grow any further; and left those matters, and let God decide what would happen to her after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the swelling is felt in the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and when it is large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are calmed, and it is fine-grained, then it is appropriate to lance it; and that which is round gathered and not long; and which is bloody or of linen color or black, then it is appropriate to avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It must therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument about which we made remembrance before; then put the inch into the eye, and pull out underneath, and cut with the second of the two instruments that I said in the incision of the almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it must be that you do not cut more than the superfluous which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the almonds, and cure it until it is sane.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of cutting, it must be that you use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate the fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the fire cautery is very painful.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put their head on your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or fire cautery, and cover it with live vinegar, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and fill the cavity of this instrument, as described.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let their head have a hair or what one puts the medicine on, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine above the eye; and the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, without descending to the throat and tongue. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it above the eye for half an hour, until you see it heated and the bites of the medicine are pacified. And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument on the cotton in the tube above, so that the cotton dries above the eye; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry for four or five days. And if you need to restart the application of the medicine cautery, do so, and after the cautery, wipe around the eye with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and cure with gargles until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take reed, yarrow, origanum, rue, chamomile, vervain, and similar herbs, and gather all of them or any of them in one pot, and put them easily, and boil; and the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and amid the pot have the instrument fitted according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And may be of silver or lead, and let one of the heads be inserted in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the pipe, until the eye is numbed; after that often repeat, until the eye dries up, and see that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen; nor do this when the hot abscess declines.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an eggshell inside the head for the patient, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh down on the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether beneficial.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is cut in the throat with a bone or spiny fish bone, or some other thing; so it must be that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue toward the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and that which does not appear to you and lies in the throat, must cause the patient to vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance this may be expelled by vomiting; or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be cut, and then you will draw out the force; and if it does not come forth from what we have said, take the plucking instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the forceps be applied to the head so that it may more easily enter the throat, and keep the head lifted high; and see that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it swell or the bone move inside; and the patient should themselves hold the instrument, for if they are able or the thing is sore; then let them push down, or he draws it forcefully all at once, equally with the whole instrument, as far as it goes.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat juice
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No juice of the throat is medicated as I said in the division by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after you press his tongue with the instrument I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it off with a very small needle, or with fine tongs that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow or move air from the cane with hot iron, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is affected by fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and give it to swallow, moving it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the blood feels the water, let it go.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not go as we have said, subfuscige the patient with arsenic sulfide, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the uve; do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are live coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cover in the middle, and into that perforation put the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not go out but goes until the blood; and the blood will fall now, and if it does not fall, you must repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and dry things, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to be forced out by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the blood, is such that when one can see it, it resembles bent tongs to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has roughness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot let go. And behold its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings after in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and incision; and there are two ways of which one is in its very resemblance, and from that it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the veins where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the solid flesh, and abscesses of the vein are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for abscesses, we must not pierce them until the boil is dead according to its completion; and there are such that it is necessary to pierce them when they are ripe, even though they do not die according to their completion, as those abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them be until they are rotted within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or when the abscess is in the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal member; or when it is in the foundation, one should pierce it even if it is dead; it does not matter that you perforate an abscess crust before complete digestion, provided that the one affecting the foundation does not rot completely and remain extended within, and may become a fistula; and cannot heal in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of perforating the abscess that is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the swelling and sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the perforation where more dependent on the abscess, and where it appears to move. Let the perforations be as long as the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places straight without folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the living flesh, it is better that you leave the perforation until its digestion is accomplished, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, the body will be lengthened by the venom of it, and it is full of much filth; and perchance the edges and depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, as the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must provide small punctures for small abscesses, and large punctures for large abscesses, and many fissures according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to lance the core, and cover; when it has become as dry as a flake, and is softened, you must do so as with buboes: and for those that are split into three angles, and for those that are covered like the leaf of laurel, as with abscesses of scrofula; and for those where you make a circular incision, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, as in superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you puncture them completely; and when the abscess is large, and has collected a great amount of pus, if you puncture it, you must not drain all the pus at once in that hour, but rather drain only part of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, and drain again as needed; do this repeatedly from large to small, until all the pus is drained; similarly, if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman pregnant, or young children, or old infirm people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because the patient shudders several times with the release of pus, and by chance the patient dies, and you are not at fault.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, clean the wound, and observe if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a complete cut, administer tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many pores, then it must be that you insert a tent in each so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you let it heal over, then it must be that you fill it with old cotton or the powder of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the bleeding occurs during your work, administer cold water and ease it with a soft cloth, and place it over the area bleeding repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, and it is controlled and treated, and the powders that I have said to use in this book are applied to their wounds, and if it is or seems to be winter, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, then you must place moist cloths on tents and blankets soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you must apply moist cloths on blankets soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, up to the third day, as we have said; and then open the abscess, drain it, and treat it as needed until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: since I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of the shoulders
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses appear on the head, and their appearances are like little bags, much resembling the seeds of a flax plant.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and similar to tumors, and have moisture like those of a chicken's egg; and there are those that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause contrary effects.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the procedures for the flank are such that you test with any instrument called "entromissoire," from which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, let it out from above through the long incision.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, burn without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it will repeatedly stick if nothing is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if it is present; if not, use water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and this will discharge what has remained overnight.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the cotton application as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds on to fat, shape the poultice according to this form, long in length; and apply all your ounces, and burn it from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the fat where it lies. And if the artery acts contrary, do as I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so for the abscess if it is stony, and for cutting and treating as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting into the stony abscess and the moisture is less burdensome, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and these were the abscesses that I examined from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a smooth, rough, and white stone, unable to break; and if any had been made of it, one would have done just as well by making a wound with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or head, those that come to the head of children and the roots of the ears, the opening must always be at the lowest part of the neck, so as to allow the bowels to issue out; and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes appears elsewhere or on other parts of the body, they are hot, and are joined together one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own site, like the lump and abscess of the neck, as we have said; and the symptoms of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some contain moisture, and others are malignant and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	For those in which you see good disposition to the touch, and resemble the color of the body, is motionless from every part and is not sore on the neck nor near the artery nor the conduit, and is not very deep; then you should copes it from above, and scorch each part, and keep the two lips of the wound with needles if needed, as we have said for abscesses of the neck. And draw a little at a time, and be sure that you do not cop the nerve nor the vein, and do not let the pus accumulate or cut too deep, that your hand does not slip, and do not go too far, so that you do not cop what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open the vein or the artery, and it does not allow further work, put in the wound ground glass, or some powders that staunch blood, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is staunch, return to your work until you complete it; then rest according to your proper indication if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, treat and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not fitting that you open that swelling at its root, but ligate it with a double strong thread, and let it fall away through it without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cure the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound, and stitch them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is necessary that you cut the root of it, pull out the core, and stitch it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have excess, puncture them where they open naturally; and puncture them as was said before, in dependence, then apply wicks with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, let the ointment cure until it is sane.
de squinance	of scabies
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote of the operation of the throat; but I have never seen anyone perform it in our land, and this is their written account.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have scabies, it is necessary to perform the incision of the throat which is called "epiglote"; and no help should be given by this method, because all the veins and the pyron in the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the ampyllae.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pyron, it is necessary to perform the epiglote to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It must therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglote, be cut over three or four small incisions across, between the two circles or by the size of the incision as seen, not in the cartilage; and those who are thus are suitable for the cutting of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched from the whole inch of the throat to the chain; and cut through the skin until it comes to the chain; avoid the vessels of blood if you see any, and then cut the syface as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the chain which leaps forth because the vein is ruptured, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed from which strangulation is suspected, bring together the two edges of the wound in the heart, and suture it soundly over the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim states that this should not be done until the throat is completely paralyzed, and the patient is judged to be dying, then proceed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and for this, the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passes, and it passes in three or four days. Then they commanded to suture the wound and cauterize until it is healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a damsela took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channel of the windpipe; and I was called to perform the cure, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it. I knew she had not cut a vein or any other major artery, as the blood was coming from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened,缝合了伤口，并彻底治愈了她； damsela的voice并未受损，很快恢复了正常；因此我敢说，在治疗咽喉疾病时无需恐惧。
de la grosse gorge	of the main throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like that of a hazel nut, and it is very common in women; and it occurs according to two manners: natural and accident; or naturally there is no device.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from within the artery; and there is fear, and it should not be operated on by making openings except in that which is small, and the probing and searching must involve all the intervening areas: if you find it as fatty as we do, and cannot be distinguished from any vein, then cut it out as one cuts fatty tumors, and draw it to its entire core if there is any; and search thoroughly at once, and cure it as fits until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways we have, of which I will say all the likenesses; and now it comes that I must say all the difference there is between us and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is heat and fever lasting until the boiling has passed, and the putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the shoulder having no heat, fever, or pain, and containing the syphix, which is its own sack and according to the color of the body, it begins like a swelling, and becomes large; and are according to two likenesses, or fat, or moist, and much in color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intromissory", according to what its form will come or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you probe or find a softer part of the lump of the abscess, and turn your two probes little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the intromissory instrument, and be careful in this that it does not burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture runs clear or of any other color, cut it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after extracting the intromissory instrument there is no further moisture, know that it is fatty, so cut it crosswise, and take it out with forceps, and gently scorch each part. Guard the cloth where it lies, and treat it soundly with the wound; and if you cannot treat it soundly whole, remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if there is nothing, it returns to us many times; and if there remains a little, and the wound grieves, fill the wound with some corrosive powders and fluids, hold the wound, and apply warm abscess-soothing things on top, and cure it with other cures until it heals; and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and cure those who require flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beating is against you or another thing hastens it, use the juice of pounded vitriol, and let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to copper that which has remained from the new one.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the intervening instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Among them are three square ones called "albaret," and one called "breb." There are also three kinds of these instruments: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses from fistulae. They are like the needles used for suturing threads, made of yellow copper or iron or silver. The yellow ones are more effective than black ones for encircling corruptions from fistulae. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the canine teeth are similar in appearance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and among these canines there are those with two corners in three ways; and among them are canines with three corners, and are also in three ways; and among them are canines with two corners, and only one corner, and are in three ways; and all of this are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief part of what is done are the incisions, and among these there are those that cut only half-way, for which we cauterize the edges, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve; and from these introductions are the alembics placed in channels, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses; and they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and no force is used except in firm parts such as legs, arms, mammary glands, and angles, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling shells of nuts, according to this form, for cauterizing blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed once where the wound heals by degrees from the veins, and in the arteries, and once they follow according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Once the breasts of some men swell when they begin to腐坏，直至似乎变成女人的乳房；并且remain ugly and swollen; and whoever needs to treat them should do so according to this form of line .b. from .g. :
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then cauterize the fat, and apply the wound with a healing salve, then suture the two edges of the wound together, and treat it until it heals. And if the breast hangs down and becomes soft due to its size as in women, cut it between the two ribs above, following similar incisions; ensuring that one edge is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the minor according to this form, from line .b. to the line .g.; then cauterize the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and administer as we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the discharge of blood, you should fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of swellings
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from beneath the swellings are forms of hard scrofula with nodes, and among them there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be lanced according to this form, from the line 2 to the line 7:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of the appearances of scrofula, lance them as we have said for the incisions in scrofula. And if the wound contains bowe, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sewn shut, many abscesses often develop. The same occurs with a swollen vein and an abscess; if one recognizes this for an arterial rupture, the abscesses grow long and large; and when you feel it with your hand, you sense the tension; and when it is due to a vein, it appears as swelling in the veins; and it is foolish to attempt to treat such an abscess, especially when it is near the armpits, angles, and around the collarbone and many other areas, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure. For him who is in chief pain, it is also advisable to avoid this method. In those swollen from arterial rupture, make a cut above the skin long enough; then operate the incision with forceps, and cleanly separate the artery from the tissues until it is fully exposed. Place an awl under the skin, piercing it through to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples. Then insert a piece of cloth between the two threads at the point where they meet, allowing the fluid to drain from one side to the other; thus, release the abscess. Continue this treatment until the threads separate. Use ointments appropriate for these conditions until it is healed. If the abscess is due to vein swelling, you must apply your hand and squeeze out as much of the abscess as possible onto the skin. Place an awl under the thread you are holding with your hand, pierce through, and use double thread to ensure thorough drainage. Once the fluid has drained, treat the excess skin and leave what is tied. Then place a moist cloth in wine and oil, and continue with bandages and ointments until it is fully healed.
des apostemes des ners	from abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses coming to the artery and to the vein, abscesses of nerves when they are injured, or through too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more frequently in joints and in all places where there are articulations, and it is the grief of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and is in many dispositions with pain; and when one restrains it forcefully, the patient feels great pain, and it is not just painful throughout the body, but beneath the heart; and it moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither below nor above, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron: by chance there might be a contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead causes the skin to rupture at the temple.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and squeeze at its root; and if it is large, suspend it by a thread, burn it, then remove it and suture the wound, treat the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large blisters hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	In no case does it occur in the belly or anywhere else on the body; it is a disease called "fungus" by its similarity to mushrooms. The roots are fine and the heads large; some are small and others quite large. I have seen a man who had two bellies that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, with no difference between them, and they were white, had small roots, and were jagged, and there was moistness in them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces, and in the other VI [pounds], and in the work of incision it is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the arterulus is white and moist and of subtle root; so cop it with large spatumile, and let the cautery be at fire in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the tailoring, there are often too great outflows of blood, and if the patient faints, you must then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient terrified and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made plonc thread, and tie the arterulus as we have said, and let it be two days; and then release, and do not cease to strain the plonc thread until it copes the arterulus, and work carefully through it; and if the roots are large, you may fear to cut directly for the belly, but you can well cut the half of them, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cut the thernel which is of fugue color and poor sense and looks like milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a fire cautery on a wound or a cut in the skin, and it is on the belly and some of the boils, as happens in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from wind; and if it is due to the rupture of the skin and the discharge of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and is a mild thing without pain, and obvious with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge from the intestines, then it is more varied, and when pressed at its base it rises and then returns, and sometimes it swells and greatly enlarges upon entering the bath and through much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and clearly apparent when you press it with your hand; it does not constrain much. And if it is due to blood, it is clearly shown by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and inserted in a certain quantity. And if it is due to phlegm, it is cold to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or phlegm.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let the treatment proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery or vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, you must instruct the patient to stretch his arm and lie completely straight, then draw it all around the mouth; then command him to lie very still between your hands, then go down to the place where you have drawn the sign for the entire circumference, then place half of the abscess above at the top of the large inch; then tie it together with a strong thread or a rope of fine silk tightly, and let it be fixed in this manner; then work the other half of the abscess stretched over the thread, and use your index finger to hold it; if you find it caught on the thread, release it, and allow the intestine to escape through the abdomen; and if you find the boil, take it with the inch, and drain the excess; and if the artery makes it contrary or the vein, go in properly, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strands of thread, and insert the needles into the cross where you made the piercing; then pull the abscess through four turns over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots, and cut out the dead flesh by itself; or you drain it when it is fine and rotten, then treat the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place with what is appropriate, and close the wound.
dou chancre	of the chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the signs of the chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid iron cure; and we say that the chancre arises in the groin, and great caution is needed in its treatment. The ancients said that when chancres are found where they can be scraped off, like those on the sameles [thighs], and in similar places, and should all be removed when they are at the beginning; but when they are large and old, it does not matter to approach them, for I have never seen any heal from them, nor has anyone healed from them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is found where one can remove it, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him sweated if he has evident distension, then shave the patient well in the place for the operation; then throw out the tumor or chancre, and all the hair from all parts, removing everything without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely, and wipe the place with your hand or something else thoroughly, and if the bleeding continues contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood has stopped; then treat it with other remedies until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already spoken of the signs of dropsy and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each sign, and the cure through medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only clarified; and one must not use iron in these two signs: namely, tympanites and yposarche, because they are deadly things; therefore, when you treat this sign of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not help, look if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy, such as an immediate solution of the belly and similar things; in these cases, do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient full of virtue, and he has only dropsy and is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus: lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the attendants press the belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the spatumile thorny according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let the point be cut in two parts, and let it not be inserted too deeply so that it cannot reach the intestines when thrust in, nor be blocked; then look to see if the hydrocele is near the intestines: if this is the case, you must cut through from beneath the scrotum three incisions over the point of the knife; and if the hydrocele is due to liver disease, make your cut on the left side of the scrotum three incisions; and if it is due to the spleen, make them on the right, and it must not be that the patient lies on the cut so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to the weak part; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, empty it, and withdraw your hand, leaving a small passage between the skin and the scrotum as if scraping with the quantity of a nail or slightly less; then pierce the scrotum until the fluid appears at that site, which is the outlet for the water, then extract, and use this instrument whose form you know.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver needle, made of light brass or steel, and used near the part beneath the small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that writers cut the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	On the head above is the alemele, such that when the instrument comes to the edge, it goes down now above the instrument; empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls senseless, or he nears death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to the dispositions of the virtue of the patient that signify, and his pulse; then draw the instrument and hold the edge, and it is held now for the key which stops the hole which is above the syface, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw a little of the edge; do this any day, and take care not to follow too much until it no longer remains but just a bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in him, cure it with warm earth or sand, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and let him drink; cure with medicines that dry him up until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping up of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born who does not have pores in the urethra, or where the pores are small, or are not in their proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to act promptly before it has pierced all the subtle parts according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then apply or insert a small plug of flax, and secure it and keep it for three days or four; and when it is time to urinate, remove the plug, allow urination, and then replace it; and by chance it may not be necessary at all, as the urine that comes forth does not always leave the plug closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the patient's plug is small, it should be medicated with a cloth of flax, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the plug in their place should be bleached, for none are born with the plug at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upward; and they cannot defecate because the matter cannot reach the rectum, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on their back, then the head of the verge and the cope are made as large as a feather's size, so that the perforations pierce through the middle, as it should; and beware of the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the verge
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these ulcers come in the verge, and they are an appearance of ugly flesh; and among them there are malignant and non-malignant; so you must treat them with a sharp lancet, and cut and cleanse all, then put on soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and offensive, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when you have taken it out, and if the ulcer is in the groin and has part inside the skin and part outside, you must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is healed, treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, it is not assured that the head of the groin will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the groin and nearby tissue; you must cut out everything that is black and corrupted, then bandage with a plaster made from the bark of pomegranate peels and vinegar, and treat it with other dressings until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is a bleeding episode, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps with the two dispositions together: that is to say, in cases of bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a rod into the penis and let the patient urinate through it. And when the hair is shaved at the head of the penis which comes to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then you must therefore cauterize with a heated instrument over a small part of the head of the penis and the skin; then separate well between them, and apply a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not burn again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the opening of wounds like other injuries; yet when we perform this work of our will, and properly for infants, it is necessary that we do the best work and the most gentle for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have none but what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have spoken with the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions using razors, forceps, and even an entire pair of scissors; they would often complain because there are two blades, and by chance one might cut above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is copper, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing which is from down below, the points of the limb are not assured; and in the cleansing of the nail by accident the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they arise thus without need of cleansing and I have willed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing which is done at the joints to all the thread of hair I have found the worth of experience, for the joints cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, you cut equally all around; but that the threads be well thin under the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you are only tying the thread around the shaft just so, and let him see you try in all manners that you can; then hold the shaft straight with your hands, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet where the child cannot see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or kiss it, and draw it up until the heads of the shaft are out; then cleanse well from the filth that is gathered, then tie the upper signet with a double thread, then tie under each link one by one; and hold at two doings in the second hour at the pouchet and the right index, and sew between the two links, then remove the keur quickly above and draw the head of the shaft; then let the blood run little by little, for it is the most painful; and put powder on and over the powder a glued wick of a half egg cooked until the water rose, confited with rose oil well and fresh, and let it be on until another day, and cure with other cures until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force for the ceremony is this: the two shoulders should be strong and sharp, and the shoulders should be as large as the thighs equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the ceremony is when the openings inside do not reach the incision; therefore, you must extend it with your nail, just as the teeth make an abscess; and keep it even, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with forceps, and then press.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass for three days, and that which is beneath the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscesses have subsided, and gently scorch it; and move it as you can, and keep away from the part of the foreskin, as it will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the limb of sudden wounds from powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if it swells beyond measure, it will not harm; cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	for retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	For the retention of urine, it is due to stone passage, or congealed blood, or bowels, or flesh that has come forth, or similar things as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released and you see the retention due to a stone at the mouth or neck of the bladder, then the patient should be instructed to bend their knees; and the feet should be placed on the back, and extend their belly from the part above the back, and constrain the patient so that they can bend as much as they can; and thus, the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone upwards, for which reason the urine is released. And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," of which here is its form: and it should be made of fine silver, light and slender like a bird's feather; and let the handle be one and a half palm long, and let it be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a little bit of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess of the wool and put it until the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with moistened oil and olive oil and water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, as much as it comes to the root of the penis, then cover the head of the penis above towards the mouth; then insert the syringe forward until the bladder, and let the patient feel the urine coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because those who conduct or where it goes are crooked; then remove the thread little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make the urine flow; and continue the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and bind the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medicines, then use the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see. The leashes are attached so that the medicines may be well absorbed by the bladder, inducing a good numbing effect. Thus, moisture can be drawn out when necessary, and poured back in when needed. When you see your medicines flow into the bladder, place the tip of the tube in the moisture, then draw it out slowly. This will draw the moisture from the bladder to the tube, and then you should firmly pour it back into the bladder; this way, the moisture enters again and is felt by the patient, now that the diseased part can sense it. And this is the form of the fine catheter used to treat the bladder: as shown here.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of copper, and the head is higher; and below at the breast where the fluids fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see to moisten the bladder in it, then tie between the two breasts forming a thick double thread, and heat that part of the moisture over the fire; then insert the chief of the clyster into the vagina, then draw your hand over the bladder until all the moisture is evenly applied, so that the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly through; then insert the strong thread in these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles the parts of the die, and put inside what you want of liquid and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture is applied to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken of the divisions of stones and their extraction along with medicines; and we have mentioned the difference between a stone embedded in flesh and all its signs, and which stone one should operate on by size; and concerning the bladder and the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder happens more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine has changed in its subtlety, seeming like water; it frequently irritates the child's penis, and causes pain many times, and then becomes more severe; most of these jumps are in the foundation. And the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and is very serious in the elderly, and is moderate for those between childhood and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have larger stones than for those who have smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a clyster to remove all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it obstructs sometimes in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and stretch and move them out, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and exits once from above; then place him in a position suitable for you, with his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward; then hold it and touch it internally; if you feel the stone in the space, now hasten to incise over the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not descend upon touching from the entire length, soften your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is in pain, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; then move your hand to its foundation, hold the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, amass at the neck of the bladder; then press above your finger, and incise where you see fit.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch his right hand upward, and remove the skin beneath the coccyx in the part where the incision is made; then he pours in the spatumile cutting, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the incision between what is between the coccyx and the pelvis, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight above the stone, and your two hands should be near the foundation or pelvis, and the incision should pass through so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance, pressing may make the hand at the foundation jump out easily; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: they are easier to remove; and some are underneath, resembling a groove and round, from which the removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those who have angles and margin, make the size greater; and if it does not fit, you must clamp with tongs that are like a file at the head, to move and extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put under the delicate curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot contrive it thus, you enlarge the hole slightly, and if the surface is uncured, you extract it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, you put the larger one first at the neck of the bladder, then cover up, then pull hard, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must sew it up, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out through him where the bones cannot close; but nevertheless strive to treat it, or to extract with tongs piece by piece until you have completed your work. Then dress the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly with a wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the inflamed abscess; then re-wrap the patient on his back, and do not untie the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, you should raise much well the head of oil and water, then treat with a salve of definnic and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosions come into the wound and clots of blood in the bladder, and thereby urine is retained, which is known to be in such a manner that without jumping with the urine: pour then your urine into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder; then wash the wound with water and grease and salt, and aid it in all ways that you see until it is healed; and it must be that for all wounds you cure, you tie the two thighs and apply the medicines to the head.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is located in the passage of the penis, and stuck there, and urine cannot pass; you should cut as I said before, but this cutting can be excused due to the need for urination.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this in such a manner.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron rods according to this form and fix them at three angles in the fire:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the penis over the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the iron rod gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron rod in the stone little by little, as much as you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come forth soon. Then press your hand above what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken soon, and its fracture is with urine, the patient recovers; and if you cannot do this for any reason, tie a thread under the stone and another above, then make the probe at the stone between the two threads, extract it forcefully, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that the stone of women is incarcerated, and if it happens even once, it must be carefully cured, and is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who can disclose herself to examination, especially when she is pregnant.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art with her hands; and the fourth manner is that the woman’s stone is more prominent than the man's, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear comes from it. And if necessity rises to these, it must be that you seek a midwife well knowing, and find her among the women there, and if you do not find one, at least get a clever midwife; and present before them a safe woman in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command about the inquiry of the stone; and look very well that the woman is a virgin: then she must use her right or foundation, and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she must compel her under her right, and recommend to her that she uses her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it greatly from the entrance of the bladder until over, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, prepare where it will be moved open, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her hand above or below the stone, and let the cut be at first small; then press the wick into the cut, if you sense the stone enlarge the wound as much as the stone can exit forth, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the signs to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the sinew breaks, put vitriol powder on it and keep it for an hour until the sinew is healed; then return to your work while the stone is being extracted, and have with you the instruments I told you about in the extraction of the stone for those who help you in your work; and if the sinew breaks, and this is from the artery that has been cut, put powder on it and bandages, and do not attempt to reset it again, leaving the stone untreated, lest the patient die suddenly; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling has gone down, then return to your work while the stone is being extracted.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous humor is nothing but a collection of moisture or white fluid, which is outside the heart of the eye, containing the egg; and it is called "syphac," and sometimes properly within the membrane of the egg, if one thinks it is another egg. And this is the skin of the eye between the white fluid we have said; and it does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this aqueous humor is due to weakness that comes to the eyes, and this material is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the eyes, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often; and these are the signs to recognize this collection, because if it is the white fluid we have said, it is the sign of well-formed abscesses, somewhat long like the figure of an egg, and does not protrude from the eyes, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in the proper membrane, the abscess is incised with a part of the egg, and because of this, one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the quill and the white shell, one senses it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you prove it through the intervening square, as its form is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intervening square, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we incise it with iron, the patient must be bled according to our power and the fullness of his body; then sow on his back, above something slightly high, and put much flax over him; sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, extending the needle to one of the two ribs of the quill of the coion; then take the leaden spatula, and cut the skin of the coion among them long until near the knife, and let the incision be straight by dividing the skin of the coion up to the white shell, and cauterize subtly according to your power; then pierce the white shell full of water through a large hole, and drain all the water out, and then put your pins, and set the white shell upward; and do not touch the quill of the coion, but only the white shell; cut completely or in pieces himself evenly subtly, that if you do not cut it well sagaciously, the water will return; and if the egg should burst during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the shell; then join the two flaps of the quill of the coion with a seam, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensive, suspecting the bleeding; then cut the cord completely at the suspensive part, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the abscess is assembled in two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood and put oiled wool in the wound; and place another moistened wool in wine and oil, and put above the two cords, and put underneath doubled cloth, and tie it all according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and fill them with shredded wool according to this likeness, and sew them together at the waistband of the trousers. One head of the shoulder is placed from the fundament up to the back, and the other on the part of the armhole; and the other two heads over the two angles, and tie all the straps in the loop of the trousers. This branch is often treated with a fire cautery instead of iron clamps, and you should use a sharp surgical cautery to burn through the skin flap containing the abscessed fluid. Then take the cautery according to this form, and prick that skin flap with the points, and brand it with the sharp hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the coagulum in all ways that you can, until you are dry; and guard that the fire touch not the egg; and know that this work is more perilous; and use guarding from bleeding, and make sure that the cuts are clean; and if anything contrary to you happens, or abscesses, or hemorrhage, or other things, cure what makes contrary to you, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, administer perforation as I have told you. When you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that watery abscess is present, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the area below with a wide lancet, and place the perforation lengthwise along the body; let the openings be large so that all the fluid may drain. Then put cotton over the wound and bind it, allowing the remaining fluid to continue to drain, and cure the wound until it is healed. If the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit through the opening of the wound, you must insert a feather or the instrument used for draining dropsy fluids, as described earlier. Widen the opening of the wound, and know that the fluid will return and gather after about six months or so; when it has gathered as before, the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	In this section there is much to fear in various disposals, which makes it seem to me that one should avoid it if possible; and I will tell you the work and similar matters of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the body, and especially from the joints; and this is by much chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to say that they come from bitter and acrid superfluity, which spreads to the joints, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body; and it does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess; and by chance it may be a grievous and stony abscess, and of fugitive color, and sometimes comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess; when you press with your thumb and index finger; and it should not be touched at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is caused by vein swelling is known by its arrangement at the expression of the touch of the thumb and index finger, and can well be cut on this appearance and on the other marks; and you must take the heart out of the veins, then set the yolk on top, and let the white stretch downward, and release the suspender from all sides of the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the yolk is already hardened with these marks, then you must cut the yolk and the heart; and if it is airy at the bottom or within the veins, then you must release all that is contained, and roundly take out the heart.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the flesh is open behind, it must be cut entirely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is accomplished, apply the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat with other dressings until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a borjon, with the groin area softened. The patient experiences pain as it fluctuates; and the treatment for this disease must be thoroughly performed as described earlier, and we will detail the work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must seat the patient on an elevated chair, then place the suspensory ligament of the groin below your knees, over all the vessels near the thigh, and tie them firmly; then cut with a sharp spatula through the traversing veins until they are uncovered, and then cauterize from each part as we have said in the extraction of arteries in temples; then insert a needle where it has the double thread, and attach it to the first knot where the vein entered, and reattach at the other end; then cover in the middle straightly according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures; then treat the wound as with others where one inserts bowe, so that no vessel breaks which nourishes one of the coions; for by this there is no harm, and if all the vessels are pierced, it is necessary to remove from all the vessels; so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be healed.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the throat
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are due to the section that comes from the throat or the extension in the abdomen in the part of the flanks, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the coxae; and this rupture is either of the throat or from the extension thereof, and come from these two kinds of causes: by percussion, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy burden, and similar things; and the signs when it is due to the extension of the throat, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until near the surface, because the throat presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to the section of the throat, that it causes an sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear varied, beneath the skin near the surface, and this is due to the discharge of the intestines and the core behind the throat.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the veins with the intestines are affected, and they remain inflamed, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when they are compressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these burns from iron, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of this work is that you command or instruct the patient to warm the intestines in his hand from within the wound, if they can fit inside; then bandage it around his neck, between your hands, and lift the thighs. Then place the keur above, and scrape all the skin from the long coions; then insert the leivers of the taille uncines according to what you need to open the wound, making sure that the oes can exit; then cauterize the syface which is below the skin from the long coions, until the white syface becomes hard visible on all sides. Then insert your index finger into what follows the coion, between the white syface which is below the skin of the egg, and between the second syface, and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second syface; and then move with your right hand inside the keur from the coions, and place the white syface on top in your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the syface towards the taille. And command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie what is air behind the ligament. Wait with your fingers if there is any intestine enveloped or hard white syface, and if you find anything, put it back into the belly under it; then take an awl that has a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the rear part of the syface, which is after the skin from the coions; behind the taille, then scrape the heads that appear from the threads until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other like a cross, and secure the syface, about which we have said is below the skin from the coions, with a strong thread from two sides. Then wrap the heads of the threads, and secure them firmly from two sides, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter outwards, so that the abscess does not come back; then reinsert the thread according to the first long thread for two fingers, and after these two threads leave the syface which is below the keur from the coions the size of a thumb; then continue all around according to the roundness that the egg carries. Then scrape in the part which is below the skin from the coions until it is clean, and the bowels, as we have said before; then administer moistened wool and place it on the wounds, and give the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent hemorrhage after incision due to doubt.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leave the thread until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, it should be removed with hot water, and then apply what we have said until it falls; then treat the wound with other dressings until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnosa
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the threads that are woven together by a weaver, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after lightly cutting the hernia; then cut it in half, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels heal; and treat it as we have said until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the groin, as we have said, and the testicles become apparent; and no parts of the intestines protrude through the wound, but if they do, it is only a little and return every hour; and still, if it remains too long at this point, the wound becomes infected or syphax, until the intestines protrude; and this happens due to the extension of the syphax in the groin, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells the testicles and the wound opens; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have already said; and sometimes the wound is treated with a iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then take the swollen testicle of the rupture and enlarge the hole according to the size of three fingers; then extract the syphax which is beneath the skin that follows, then place the flax and put it over the apparent testicle; and press it well against the belly, then suture the two apparent testicles above the head of the flax, and suture both; then extract the head of the flax, and do not cover or extend the wound or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The flax is constrained, and shows no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterizations are healed in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the knees
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin of the knees is softened in some people because the flesh within is softened, and it is to be seen. When one wishes to treat it, one must lay the patient prone on their back, and cut away the soft skin above the natural skin. Then join the two edges with a single stitch, and if you see fit, sew the excess of the soft skin with three or four stitches firmly. Afterward, cut between the stitches and treat the wound as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	by due correction
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Such correction is prescribed in our law, and since I find it fitting that I not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: one is that you may know how to respond when asked about it and know its treatment; and the other, because we often have need to correct certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that corrections are made in two ways: either by attraction or by splitting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform by attraction, place the beast in hot water until the joints become soft and relaxed. Then grasp them with your hand while they are thus restored and you no longer feel any pain.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castrating a bull: you must brand the beast, and press the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut above each ovary one time when you have well scalded them; and leave some of the fatty substance and the fine fatty substance that is under the vessels; and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because in attraction there remains by chance something from the testicles, which causes the beast to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to two manners in men: one is that between the two testicles it appears as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in the middle there is urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and it is done with a knife as a rod and two pegs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you clean all the set bones, and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, for those whose urine flows through the skin of the pegs, it does not require any treatment.
de la tentigene	of the wart
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A wart is a set bone on the natural part, such that it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is how they are treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to dye the excess of the wart with your hand or needles and treat it gently; and do not apply too much, lest blood flow, then treat it with other remedies until it heals. And for another bone that arises at the mouth of the vein, fill it and sometimes it may burst, and it resembles a cow, hence they called it in ancient times "kowee disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to extract it, as we have said about the tumor and its treatment, and continue the cure until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratum
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the perforation is small; and it is natured by birth, or an accident caused by illness that comes about; or it is through artificial means, or a thin or thick syphon, and is made perfect in the liver, or in the flanks, or below, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and sometimes flowering to have; and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppages are close and apparent, seek help with your fingers or the rag.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle sore and near the two flanks, hasten, and proceed thus: put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two flaps, as much as the subtle sore requires, and place them over the stumps; then take wool, and fat in oil, and apply it to the flesh, and let the woman lie on her side each day, so that it does not heal too quickly.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sore is hard and thick, it is necessary to apply several layers of lint resembling leaves of bay.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stumps are of flesh born, suspend them with a pin and a cop; and have the blood-stopping medicines, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, incense, together with plenty of egg; then apply a wide strip of lint, so that the wound does not heal; and thus leave it long, and give him another linen tent to dry; then continue to treat with other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is abscessed pus in the boil, you must treat it according to this method, unless it is an embedded abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the embedded abscess in the boil, one must not touch it to incise.
des emorroides	for hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without core (intake) usually occur frequently. And when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into warts; and I have already described similar cases in the division of symptoms, and their signs, and now I will describe those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and warts, when fully inflamed in the boil, do not appear by sight, except for those cured with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the boil, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then put the gall-bladder in its roots, and sprinkle medicines that restrain blood, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranate peels and galingale and similar things, and then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, if they cause suction cups to be applied to the back and breasts without piercing; then take wool, and the fat in the juice of plantain or in the juice of agrimony with old wine, and apply it there.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so you should treat it as I said for the thigh; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the armpit
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the armpit, such as chancre, pierous abscess, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must say in this treatise on the hot abscess that comes from the armpit, which is not among those abscesses that swell like boils; and if you wish to know the ironwork, observe whether the abscesses are hard at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and become red if you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce but let it die until the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on the seat, and have two small seats or cushions for him to recline, supporting his back and aligning his feet with the parts below the leg; and spread his thighs, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them tightly with a good bandage; then apply the bowl to the right side, and bring it to the location where the mouth of the armpit is made, from which the form will come later; and it must be that when you see this instrument being administered, you insert the needle first to know the depth of the armpit, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it must cover the depth of the armpit with cloths, so that the instrument does not weigh on him; and it must place the horn of the instrument above, and touch the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened, and it is made soft by hand, you must cover it at the head, in the spatumile leak; and when the bow is emptied, you must put moistened cloths in rose oil, or in green vitriol oil; place the end of the cloth over the sore and above the knife on a clean moistened cloth in water or honeyed wine that has been cooked; then cure after two days with ointment suitable for this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the sore and the wound by enema with water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and long pepper that have been cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed over the sore, you must take care not to use iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The craft is first in labor when she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing downward, and desiring to urinate: then hasten the birth; thus know that this birth follows its natural figure, issuing with its head, and the second follows with it; and when you see these signs, you must gently press her abdomen, so that the child comes forth quickly; for when it descends on its head, the second follows with it, and is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. And who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes sometimes on its feet, and comes forth through the body or the shoulders, and the hands, or it comes through the abdomen or loins, and is turned by chance over its neck, and by other evil figures; therefore it is necessary for labor that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes to his head naturally, and the woman gives birth easily, and the virtue of her is weak, then place her on a seat, or hold her; and from its nature, take oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the mixture between her two small labia as they are formed.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the secondine, and take off as much as its moisture is expelled; and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends. If it does not descend, then cleanse the woman with fenugreek muscilage and olive oil; then make her drink and sneeze with condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands protrude, you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet high; then raise the seat to the ground, and support the woman so she does not move during the extraction; and if the hands cannot enter and the child has died, cut the hands with the knife mentioned earlier, extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child above his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the infant comes above its feet, one should lift it up; then turn it little by little, until it is even; then straighten the legs and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump as far as the knees, instruct it to stretch, and make it sneeze by coughing; if it jumps, let God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to natural alignment.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly aligned.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not jump as we have said, take a muscled althea bark, and silk worm's eye, and melted gum, and grind them all in the mortar; then apply this ointment to the woman's nature, placing it beneath. Have her sit in warm water until below the ribs; when she is softened below, place a myrrh collar over her, and put it under, and let her remain for an hour; then have her sit on the seat, and make her sneeze while holding her mouth and nose, and gently rub her abdomen, for the infant now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue from the child above its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child takes this form, gently place its hands little by little; then bind it on its neck, and let its feet hang down, and lie down on the bed; bend its hands little by little, and then place its hands on its belly, and remove the cushions under it until it is prepared to come down; and if the child does not cry, take its feet and move them into shape, then move its belly upwards, then put your hands in; and slowly pull the child; and command the woman to support it as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child that comes wide with one hand hanging
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must devise to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, make her stand and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her down on the bed, and prop up her legs. Then administer the ligature as I have recounted; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the seat, then strive to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to grip until the infant is delivered.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I must have the midwife grasp the child's hand, then turn it little by little and gently; and when it is aligned, place the ligature of thread and oil, as we have said, then command her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command her to grip; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to all the secondine in this manner, scrape the secondine with your nail until the moistors are evacuated; and if the pains can be felt on her face and on her neck, scrape from the cleft, do not retain it, and end the pains; then put the child inside, as soon as you have placed it properly, and instruct the woman to push once: then gently extract.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the extraction of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not strange, nor does it happen rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are extracted and do not live much, if at all; I know these, that they be multiplied, and are deprived by the syphilis which devises them, which is linked to the bowels; and sometimes sent naturally as if they were many undergrowths, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out properly, the treatment as we have said, and let the bile be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do so as it is worth to contribute to healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and it must be that the bile know all this, for similar things may happen; do so according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the mother of the dead child or abdomen, as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you are forced to perform manual operations; you must know whether the woman is of sound health and has no accidents or fear of death; the woman should be soothed on her back, with her head inclined forward, and her legs raised; the minister should support from two sides, tying her to the bed so she does not move during the descent of the child; then rub the mother's mouth with moist oil mixed with muscilage of ale and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and muscilages; gently insert the fingers into the mother’s anus, then remove them in a manner suitable for the situation, ensuring that the child is prepared to descend on its head; if the descent is through the feet, insert or puncture at the middle of the back; it must be ensured that the first dose goes to her right hand, and place the cord between her left index finger; she should gently apply this to all her fingers, inserting the dose into any of the places we have mentioned until it reaches an empty spot; this is the form of the dose:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then drive it against the other awl, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal; and then stretch equally by moving back and forth, to allow them to come out, and let the awls have teeth to hold them, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, open with any of his eye teeth, and push it into that part, and cut the other part; and if there remains nothing, set this awl or higher up, and do this until all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by gripping, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until all comes out; then fold it at the joint of the sole or on the cut, and thus you must do in the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and the birth passage is narrow, or if there is a sharp protrusion, then you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers, make the cut, and extract the sharp protrusion; or you may use an instrument called "almidach", which comes with the tools or chapter after this one; and thus do the same to cause the child to naturally pass through a large opening; and then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head suddenly becomes dislocated and is forced into position, split it until the moisture that has entered comes out; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the abdomen or below the back, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the injury is on his feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is narrow in the belly or on the breast, it is necessary to extract it with an inflated bandage wrapped around the hand; and make an incision in the belly or the breast, as much as the fluids that are there permit; and if the other limb has been removed, and the head remains, he should apply his hand thoroughly to the mouth of the vein, and draw it until the mouth of the vein; then he should apply one or two ounces, and draw firmly; and if the mouth of the vein is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, it is not necessary to work on it, but it is necessary to administer moist and greasy things; and he should apply poultices, and a compress in water softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the injury is on his side, and you can place it even, then administer what we have said for the living child; and if one cannot do so, then use forceps to realign, leaving nothing of the second attempt.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply what we have said for the abscesses that come in the loins, and if bleeding occurs, it should be placed in cold water restraining, and continue with other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then缝合了另一个，使第二个也死去。
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the mouth, and swelled so much that it opened, and began great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought long, and could not staunch the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came some bones, and after some days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled much, for the abdomen has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I treated the wound, and found bones in her abdomen, until the woman was much improved; and the woman lay there long thus, and had just a little blood from it; and I recollected this chapter only because when masters find a strange thing, they must know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After comes the form of the presser, to which the books refer; and to two turns of the shoulders of the limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Therefore, the horns should be finer than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth be two fingers wide, and the margin one finger in thickness, and long a palm and a half. Between the two limbs, there should be two adjustments of the same wood, firmly fixed on both ends, each half a palm long or a bit more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open it when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, finer and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of pliers; and have two adjustments at the shoulders, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide. When you wish to open the marrow with this entire instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread apart, then insert the two adjustments together into the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the pliers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the marrow until the blade does what it wills.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely mounted, and its appearances are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been arranged, it is more rapid in its work, and higher for men because of its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not wish to use the instrument, make sure you have arranged it, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to grip her hand, and then administer a snuff of condisi, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she convulses because of this, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pessary or coverlet, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the patient, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, may be cooked or placed in water on fire. Then put a tube or pessary into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the patient, and hold it until the vapors enter the patient. Then administer snuff as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not yet healed, command the maid to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk oil, and then place her hand in its natural position, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, take it and extend it little by little straight, so that the muscle does not wrinkle during the extraction; but you must move it lightly from side to side, and then cut; it will come and loosen.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the muscle is greatly narrowed, we have already mentioned the treatment for sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not cured by all that we have said, then guard against treating it improperly. But you must tie what is at the mouth of the muscle to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with tetrapharmacon ointment; she will take it and be healed. But still, if she takes it and comes upon a bad smell in the stomach and head, and sickens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If therefore suitable fumigations are needed for it: some of the ancients have proven the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass resembling a cane, and one places the fine end in the nature, and the large heads above the fire; and let the fumigations be upon the coals, and the scab until it is wasted, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, but instead have it stopped with a small plug: therefore it is necessary for the baile to pierce that plug in the right place, and not pierce the fundament itself with a sharp awl, and be careful that she does not touch it; then put on wet wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure with ointment until he is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, place or tie a piece of lint, and let it remain there, and be removed when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stoppage comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be treated suddenly: it should be cleaned, as we have said for the piece of lint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodules, and grow larger than those that come out of the fundament defying its function, or in the space between two parts, there may be one fistula or multiple; and when this nodule is old, it works, and often contains moisture, like white pus or fine bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are Persian; they are known by those who have them through evacuation or windiness when the patient has an evacuation, and by accident during a passing of a bowel movement.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas penetrate to the bladder, and to the half of the penis; and reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the fistula penetrates to the fundament and not: it is that you place your index finger or probe into the fistula, and insert a subtle needle of brass or iron when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a subtle probe of linen or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of feces or wind or blood, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is infected up to the bladder or up to the urethra, then he urinates, and cannot be cured by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, the infection comes up to the place; if there are no twists and the location of the pain is clear, then it is likely deep seated, and neither medicine nor immediate application will help; in these infected fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of those who attempt them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	For those that are neither infected nor old, with hope of healing through iron, as I have proven, and where the patient lies on their back; lift the legs up to their thighs, and incline the thighs towards the abdomen; then place a tent over them with charcoal or tinder if there are twists, as long as you know where the tent should come to.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep within the fundament, you should place your index finger there; if you then feel that the tendon has been pierced, know that it is perianal; if no work is done on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can well treat some, but this happens rarely. The aid we make, it is to heat the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and you pour it hot into the fistula until it comes from the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that these wetted chars are burned, which resemble a bird's feather; and then cure it with ointment moistened in butter until the char is gone, then cure it with healing ointment closing the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus healed; and if the tent passes between, and does not pierce just to the depth which is the foundation, and there between your thumb and the tent a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering from the heart; cut off the coprolith from the beginning of the fistula, and place something in front of the tent, and cauterize after, until it comes to the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and fall; then remove those fleshly parts that seem like a bird's feather, and let none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound fails and cuts between you and the work, cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the cauteries of fire, two good things are assembled: that is to say, the burning of these edges cauterized, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture; then the treatment of wounds moistened with butter or ground cheese, until the eyes release pus, and the edges burned in the pus; then treat the wound with ointments thick with hard charcoal, and they are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the point of its foundation and is distant from the body, place your thumb or foundation there and inquire it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the tissue or muscle or edges, or it is ready to perforate, do not have any way that is not based on trust and hope, by administering one of the three methods: or you cauterize as we have said, or you cut down to the bottom, or if you can, place tents and treat as first; and do not go too far from the point, lest you cut through the tissue that holds the foundation, causing involuntary evacuations; then treat, as we have said; by chance it will be healed. Or you remove that cover and clean it once it is cut away from the bottom, or by tent or another pointed instrument; then shave the defective flesh in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula above the foundation: this would be a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are treated in this manner: and it is when you puncture the fistula, and it is located near the foundation beneath the skin, so take a needle perforated at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you wind the thread around twice, and insert the needle with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perforated in the margin beneath the foundation, then extract the thread from that punctured area, as you would insert your finger or probe; and pull the tip of the thread, and join the two heads together, and hold them against each other, and leave them for one or two days; and hold them together again until the threads cover the gaps between them and heal; then treat the wound until it is healed and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it perforate in all the ways you can, provided it is not already too well formed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature if it is already too well formed, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinous spatumile from which we make the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not on the other, for that which should not be cauterized, you do not cauterize, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways: either they are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and they often have blood inside them; some may be in the fundament and at its head. But those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes have a bit of yellowish water or a bit of blood, and have the color of flesh. The treatment for those within the fundament is to instruct the patient to sit out until the fundament allows it, and the threads appear; if you rush, use tongs or your finger to remove them, then cauterize at their roots. If the moisture prevents you from holding them, use a sponge, or a cotton ball, or a piece of flannel; pull them out with your fingers, then cauterize, and dust with some warm powders that serve as a cauterization; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, and treat them with other treatments until they are healed. If the fundament cannot release, apply a strong and bitter enema to wash what is within it, so that it may pass openly; when the patient is well, and the threads have come out of the fundament, the treatment is light; you can grasp them with your fingers or tongs, remove them, then treat as we have said until they are healed, and fear surgical incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must administer the suturing in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it through a needle, then draw the thread over and make the needle pierce from another side, turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let them be wide; then tighten the thread firmly, tie the thread, remove the needle, and do so with all the others, leaving one to drain the excess blood; then place a moist cloth in oil of roses or cerate on the foundation, put it down, and command the patient to rest; and leave him until he convalesces, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatments until he is fully recovered.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dry the foundation or dressing dryly
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, dryness of the intestines occurs suddenly, due to natural constraint, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must reset at the point of a spatule or under your nail the skin above, which you do not let moisten; then cure it until it dries as it should; and if it cannot dry, renew the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals and is scorched; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formice is a small false appearance on the body, and goes very rapidly throughout. And sometimes one finds it cold, and feels like dying from trembling, and comes over all the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a needle from an goose feather, or a very hard vulture feather, and place that needle on the tremor, so that the red thread encircles the tremor completely; then turn your hand with all the needle until you cover the tremor completely, and put it perfectly, and root out the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a needle of spider silk or iron according to this form, and make it subtle beneath and passing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Not piercing it, for must hold with the thumb and forefinger, and must press. And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the shoulder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	None of the time the shoulder is cast in silver or lead, or in melted iron or small links; and none of the time instruments made from these materials, both small and large, are used according to their size.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those instruments that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the stomachs are tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it should have a separation or the stomachs are tied as you see, and the shoulder is pierced through; and it has two holes on one side and one on the other. The stomach is placed where medicines are put, either in a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, with one thumb's breadth between each hole. Then insert a strong thread of raw silk twisted ten or so times into each hole, and sew the stomach together like a sheep. When the medicine is inside, tie it tightly with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then cast it; and this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently; then withdraw the ministers' hands together as much as all is visible, then extract the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine sees fit to come out, let the fistula be cleansed as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it will be greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clysterize for a belly discharge disease, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is or foundation, or abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin is compressed.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division of wound care; now we will speak about hand treatments and medicines according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the joints or places where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are from the strike of a stone, and the cut of a sword or knife, or a lance or club or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the joints of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple wounds of the head, because the chapter on them will come later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a head injury, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is due to a stone impact or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess hot: so make it quickly sanguineous from the cephalic vein itself if only little blood comes from the wound, and let the sainie on the contrary from the damaged part; avoid the patient's excessive intake of wine and large foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not become sanguineous, let the flesh be diminished, and do not drink wine nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if a hot abscess comes, only wet cotton in rose oil, or styptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not dried by air or powder, the powder that I will say a little later; and if the fire has dried it, put on some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tenting, then join them with suturing, as I will say for wounds of the belly, regarding suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and spongy, and can only be held with a little, then dress it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat solid foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, like beans, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten skin and it does not affect the bone, then dress it completely, apply a poultice, and then cure it. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be staunched without surgery, and cannot be stopped by medicine, then ligate the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: it is that you put this powder which heals as if the arsenic had moistened it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live wax three parts, and mix them finely, and apply the powder to the wound, and bind it tightly, until it dries well and joins all its blood; and then dress it well, and leave it undisturbed if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with only wax, when one does not have incense or the dragon's blood, but let the arsenic moisten the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the surgeon has changed the wound while it was still fresh, one should not put this powder there; but apply some digested ointments, or pulses of flour of barley made with water and honey until they produce sweat; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other means but to let the cure alone and put nothing restraining on them, for it hurts the nerves and causes them to wither; and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicine above, such as boiled wax in soft water, mixed with rose oil, and boiled wool also washed in soft water, and other mine stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, suture and bind it with bandages, then let the cure proceed until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with bowels, puncture or make a larger incision lower down; and if an artery is severed, and bleeding results, sew it up, ligate it, and cauterize it as needed; and if the spinal cord of the throat is severed, or the vessels, and the passage through which the flesh goes is guarded, therefore the meat goes, suture the vessel on the nerve of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural figure; then tighten properly, and let it for a few days, then cure with drying ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, quill it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, and leave those that you cannot have until the wound rots away, and the discharge is removed; and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, examine whether from the wound there gushes black blood: then you know that the wound is fatal. If it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put in any powder or cover it up for the blood to fully coagulate and return to the heart, which would kill the patient; but apply an attracting ointment and change it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more. If there will be no spasm, nor evil tremor of the heart, nor deep injuries; and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure therefore the sores and other treatments until he is healed; and if she cannot heal, operate, then you know that there is an abscess; treat her as we should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse or on the back, treat the one in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, treat with powder; and if it is near the bone and has cut pieces, clean the wound, and remove any foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound drain to ease the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, make your judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	For the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the abdomen are great and medium and small; from a large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, by which there is internal disruption; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one, because we cannot easily put back the intestines once they are cold, as we can if we put them back while still warm; for when the intestines swell quickly upon feeling the cold, they re-enter the body more forcefully, and thus a medium-sized wound may be better, as we properly place the intestines in their correct position with other wounds. And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways: the two common stitches happen in the abdominal wall seam, and the seams of other body wounds are also common; but they are more suited to the abdominal wall seam, and I will say each one and clarify.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and no intestinal matter is present, and there is nothing difficult to remove, this can be done by one of two methods: either due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in a proper manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth with only water, or you can boil it in water with quince and cypress and spice, and cleanse the intestine until the swelling is removed; and once this astringent wine is made, it must be applied to alleviate swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or with cooked mallow and vervain, for these herbs are known to reduce inflammation; if they cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound using the instrument with which hemorrhoids are treated; and the first cure must be applied only after the cut is made, as there should be no unnecessary cutting unless absolutely necessary; and this is the tool for making the incision: so cut inward along the curve and do not sever completely, and observe here the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has protruded, put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper location, if you have the ability, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the part below the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the abdomen, raise his head and hips higher than the parts below, and likewise if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, place him such that the severed part is higher than the other; and thus you must manage as I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And for small wounds, use what you have prepared. Have at hand the minister of purses that can hold all the thread in his hand, and sew up the edges; this is the common method of suturing, where you take a needle or more, depending on the width of the wound. Leave some space from the head of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread at that spot. Pierce both ends of the skin with the needles from inside the skin, so that it passes through from one side to the other, then bring together the four ends of the needles in assembly; then pass double thread around the needle from both sides, and assemble the edges of the wound accordingly. Leave some space again, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, without ceasing until all parts of the wound are secured. The needles should be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, because very fine needles can cut through the flesh entirely, and overly thick ones cannot easily enter: therefore, they should be medium-sized. Do not insert the needles too far into the flesh and skin to avoid cutting the wound before suturing; then remove the needle heads so they do not irritate the patient when sleeping, and place covers or cloths over the needle heads for easy handling, leaving them until the wound heals. This method of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as one needle suffices for a second stitch; this is where you bring together the four ends of the skin and suturing thread on one needle, and when you have pierced these four ends, reduce the needle to the part where you began, doing it in the manner we mend cloth. Leave the thickness of a small coin between each stitch. This suture will last, and I once sewed a wound on someone's abdomen that had been cut by a knife, with the wound being more than a palm wide, and containing intestines two palms long, situated in the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestines after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the priest had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and thread from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced the heart straight through, leave the tip of the needle on the syphac or sutured area where you have threaded the needle, and let it pierce from another side starting from the inside out. And the meaning of this suturing is that you sew as a tanner would put together hides, leaving the syphac once on one side and again on the other until the entire suture is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen stated precisely, is such that none do it otherwise: they join the two parts naturally and apply one chief thread to another chief, in this manner: insert a needle or chief of silk nearby, and make a single piercing through the skin, leaving both sides of the cut; then turn the needle, and make a piercing from the outside until inside, through the two sides of the cut; and this is the main method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and none testify to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, or there be thread in each; and one must thrust one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds. And know that when the wound is within the belly, the suturing is greater than on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound filled with all its blood, as the surgeon has cleansed it, so you put back the intestines and the skin; then set on the powder growing flesh, and if the surgeon has cleansed it, you set on any ointment that is present until the wound heals; stitch the threads, and let the bandages and the medicaments be tied; then cure the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, you put on old cotton soon as it begins to ooze blood, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound makes communication with the principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered heat oil or in rose oil, and place it between the layers, and under the flaps; and if it feels pain or putrefaction within the flesh, and this often happens, then use clistherines of black wine heated, especially if the putrefaction comes to the intestines; and pierce from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the weakness of the veins there and the subtlety of the whole body, and its closeness to the nature of nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the shoulder jumps from the wound, reset it back as with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned brown or black, then you must tie the part that is black, to prevent blood from flowing, because there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ties, and place the two heads hanging below the part of the wound up to above for easier extraction when the shoulder falls out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the joint
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, one can restore it in some people, for I saw that a nobleman was wounded or his belly pierced by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became fistulous, and excretions and wind issued from it; I treated it as best I could, and did not cease to dress it until it healed, and the flaps were sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sutured, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and there was no pain at all, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some surgeons said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner: take flax thread with large eyes, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on the two edges, so that it clamps its mouth shut; then cover the head, and this remains so that it cannot be untied, then put another thread after in that manner as before, until the wound is completely filled; thus the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head is burnt in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, one can sew the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that be most undamaged, then tie it at its head with a thin linen thread twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and stitch the intestine, and tighten it at the rupture; and this method of stitching for worms is not removed but according to the way of hope and faith; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the larger intestines, there is nothing that can be done but with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", especially when it is covered and drains slowly.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it is also covered like the feathers of an eye; and sometimes it drains clearly, and at other times thickly; sometimes little, and at other times enough; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound that does not heal and has no flesh, can only be cured by one of the nine causes: namely, through the smallness of blood or corpus; or due to its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and above the edges, which prevents new flesh from growing; or there is too much pus; or the bones are decayed, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine used in the cure is not good; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region where digestion is delayed, health is delayed, and it swells naturally; or there are veins or bone: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the medicines for treatment in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it must be that I shall make thee know the cure of fistula which is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the throat, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and so it is such that it affects the principal property of the body part.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of great concern for healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come from this source, and you have faith in its cure, and you see it known, take a tent of wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, keep it steady; and if the fistula is curved, search for it with a subtle tent of flax, for flax fibers can bend around the curvature. And if the fistula has openings and you cannot thoroughly search it by means of tents, cleanse it with a purge through one of the openings, as moisture flows from one opening to another and cleanses it; then carefully probe it that you may know whether there is bone or nerve, and is healed properly, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressed upon by your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know its location, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of those places I have said, treat it according to what I have said, and remove the foreign matter and corrupted flesh that are within; and then continue the cure until it is healed. And if the fistula is deeply embedded in the correct place, it must be treated thoroughly as much as you can, then put moistened tents in medicated water, and let them fill up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine may corrode the excess that remains at the bottom; and then apply ointments with healthy flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this means, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, treat it accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve is not damaged or among the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the king remain until all the corruption is removed, then cure the surrounding flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, return to bowing as before: know that you have not gone far enough: so expose and remain until you are at the core, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot reverse it; there is no other means but to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tongs, do so with an appropriate instrument; and if there are many bones, extract all of them, leaving none; and if moisture opposes you, and there is neither error nor fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if thou canst not remove them within an hour, apply something corroding to the wound and let it remain until the flesh is corrupted around the bones, then the bones will be lighter; and if it be a large bone, such as of leg or thigh, reset only the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound; and if there is much of the corrupted part, coming to the marrow of the bone; it shall have to be cut out entirely up to the corruption, and then cure until it be knitted; and I will tell thee of a fistula which came to a man in his leg, so that thou mayest take example and aid in thy work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around XXX years of age, who had pain in his leg due to a cause within the body, such that the matter came to the leg and it became swollen with a large abscess. There was no reason to open it; but the attendants, out of their folly, opened it repeatedly until many matters drained from the abscesses, and it became a fistula, and much corruption came from the pores, filling the body with pus and moisture. Many attendants treated it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing until I was called; and I saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, and the great corruption that flowed through the pores; and the body of the youth turned red, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some entered against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and cut into one of the holes sufficiently to discover a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with corruption extending into the inner bone; I saw what appeared from the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption, until what I removed; and began to heal the wound with medicines for a long time, but could not suture it; and then restarted, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuous in the bone, and treated it, and then removed it, and labored to bind the flesh; but I could not do so much that I cut into about a palm's breadth of the bone, which was brought to complete decay, then healed it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and sutured, and no longer needed further work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and out of fear of death for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For during the evacuation of bloodletting often occurred, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone a hard scar formed, and it was well situated and had no harm nor any adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a ligature, and draw it tightly over the end of the bone that protrudes, and command someone to extend it upwards; then place another ligature of wool larger than the first ligature around the scar that is near the bone, tightening the end so that you pull the corrupted flesh away from the bone, and expose the flesh at the spot where you wish to treat, ensuring that the bone does not press against the flesh; and place a hot stick or board under the bone to help cure the corrupted flesh; and it should be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and treat it again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, uncover the flesh entirely; then place a coal under it, and after burning from one part to the other through the corruption, let the burning be long enough of the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut out the corrupt part of the joint, and sew the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no old one but by copper; and if the corruption is where a knife of the hand or a knife of the foot, it is very strong that thing, but in any case, you must inquire about that corruption, how it reveals to you; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but such that the vein or nerve do not oppose you; and know that the incision and the cords for coppering these bones are many, according to the structure of the bone and the appearance of the bone, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and because of this, it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable to each work; and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so think about the tool you need according to what it suits.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder dislocates either from within or from external causes; and when you have treated the corrosion by cleaning with medicines, and it does not benefit, then you must treat that limb until reaching the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient may escape death, or the greater malice from the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the member becomes black, seeming as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption of the limb spreads to other limbs and takes over the whole body; so hasten in treating it, and if it is due to the sting of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar, and the corrosion is on the head of the thumb, then treat it, giving no space for it to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes as far as the hand, one should brace at the joint, so that the corruption does not come as far as the arm; and if it comes to the arm, one should brace with a cord; and if it passes the cord, it is death, and there is no remedy except by the quantity of its virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, one should brace after the other joint; and if it pierces, one should brace the entire pierce; and if it rises in the leg, one should brace at the joint below the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to leave the patient to die; and the manner of bracing or fixing the limb is that you tie it above and below, extend some ministers on one side down, and others ministers on the other side up, and you open the flesh between the two sides with a spatula wide enough for the bone to be uncovered; then brace or fix, and put a linen bandage on each side, so that the sinew does not touch the healthy flesh, and bring about another lesion and abscess around the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the bleeding comes when you work, cauterize the limb quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, bind the injured member with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a pious man: he had a darkness that seemed like a burning fire, and this corrosion came first on his toe of the foot, so much that it encompassed the whole foot; and when the doctors saw the corruption, they hastened to cut the foot, and he was healed; long after, the corrosion returned to his toe of the hand, and he came to me, and I applied things reflective after the cleansing of the body, but the corrosion did not cease; and he begged me to amputate his hand, but I would not, because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and I also feared that if I cut his hand, he might die, for the virtue of a man was weak; and he became desperate all over, returned to his land, and hastened to cut his hand, and was healed; and I did not relate this story except because one should do otherwise if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess arises in the flesh, and stays so long that it gathers a great mass of pus; then it ruptures and drains, and the pus jumps out, leaving the lumps visible as if they were vessels; and the skin above is as thin as delicate thread, and does not drain all the way to the bone or to the nerve, and such an illness is called "sain," and is not called a "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone properly, it is called a "fistula"; and the skin is such that you peel off all the skin around it, especially when it is thin, as delicate thread; and it does not rupture due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have found that the skin will peel off, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus: first, examine whether the swelling is large, and the pus within has a foul smell; then prepare an Egyptian medicated enema as follows: take asafoetida, oil of roses, and litharge, all equal parts, and boil them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey. Then, according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and use it to treat the swelling, pressing on the abscess; leave the medicine there for two hours, then remove it by wringing out any excess. Do this several times until the swelling is reduced and the pus is drained; if you do not have this medicine, you can use ashes from vine branches as a substitute: pour water over the ashes, strain them, and use the liquid to treat the swelling until you see that it is well cleaned. If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, use a mixture of water and honey with a small amount of litharge; or you can mix honey and wine, where the honey has purifying properties and the wine helps the abscess drain; when you have done this, and if you believe that the swelling is thoroughly cleaned, treat it with a salve that promotes flesh growth. Use oil of roses and wine to prepare it. Or use various medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned or discussed in treating ointments. If the abscess in the breast is small and the enema canister cannot reach it, enlarge it slightly with a sharp object, and place an Egyptian ointment tent or basilicon ointment over it; if the wound is too large, cover only the area where the enema can enter, and if the pus-filled abscess is above, cover it more below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bow is in perfect position, do not allow flesh to fill it in; and if you cannot cover the breast with what you see, prepare it in such a manner that the bow runs as low as it can go, for when the bow is perfect, do not allow flesh to fill it in and if you cannot cover the breast with what you see, prepare it in such a manner: that the bow runs lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to place over the sound part, and keep them under a linen drape that covers all the healthy area; then apply force towards the hole in the breast a little wider than the first, for apply ointment with wool according to the size of the hole, and put it on the hole in the sound part to lighten the bow, and do not remove the large drape outside until after many days once; and that which is under the hole in the breast, often remove to remove the bow, and know what flows from the bow, if it be venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a manner and you see the nature that stands above the hole in the sound part, know that the breasts have already come forth, and approach health; and then release the wound in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast expels undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not affected.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose wounds heal slowly due to their condition, and those who do the opposite. And if undigested food comes from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not affected; and if the breast takes a long time to heal and is far away, apply drying medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as anointing diafinity, for there is a large part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take diafinity ointment, make it with rose oil, and sprinkle with equal wine in substance; then let it infuse and use it; and if you do not have diafinity ointment, cook honey thickened, or mix mirbane, aloes, and frankincense, grind them on honey when it is heated; then apply a paste, place it on the breast, and sometimes administer long plantain roots, which are like flour of wheat and farro; and use simple or compound medicines: grind them, make powder, put on the honey as I said, and use it; and if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, know that the corruption is deep, affecting the bone, or hard limbs, or ligaments; so treat the fistula from this treatment, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Pain in the nail is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or foot, or by chance arises elsewhere; and when it grows old and one does not take care of it, it comes to the abscess chaus, and spreads and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance may reach all of it; and brings corrosion until it reaches the bone, causing painful inflammation, and the head of the finger becomes wide, and the color fades.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the wound does not heal, then you must cut away all the remaining flesh from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is much great help if the bone is sound and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses upon the flesh and begins to prick, and the blisters, then you must place a rag under the nail that keeps the flesh apart, and lifts it up, and cover that fine flesh gently and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it and treat forcefully, for as long as the bone decays, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone decayed, then cover it as described before, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is injured and swells up, and feels great pain, then you must first heal it; then cover the nail with a sharp spatule cut across, and watch that the cuts do not grow down to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, then put something on that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain comes from the dislocation of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	the dislocation that arises in the hands of some men by chance is either all flesh or has part or it has bone, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birthplace is in any of our joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	That which arises in any of the joints of the hand does not move, and that which arises at the joint of the hand, by chance, does move; the size of that which is flesh is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which arises at the root of the joint is grievous to treat: handle it with care.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The movements that come together in this way come either by birth, or suddenly from a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut this scar, so that it heals according to its natural form; then place between two moist cloths or pieces of wool soaked in rose oil, to prevent them from adhering; or you can place between two thin pieces of linen until they are sutured as is appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the burn comes to either of these with the palm, cut this scar as is appropriate.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	his veins large enveloped full of surplus melancholic humours, which come from many members of the body; and more occur in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer to him once an evacuation of black bile, and then cure him with the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron cure is according to two methods: one is to cauterize and cut out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and let all the black blood flow out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this manner: first, immerse the leg in very hot water until the flesh becomes tender. Then, stretch the patient's leg from just below the knee to the part above the knee; next, make a cut in the vein on one side, or two sides, or three sides, using a broad incision. Then lift and let all the black blood flow out by hand from one end to the other, until as much blood is released as the patient can endure. Afterward, close the wound and instruct the patient to dye it with meat juices that contain black bile; then repeat the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The removals of the stone are done in this manner: straighten the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it into a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and place a cloth over the vein from its length to the head of the knee, or below the ankle; then cut the skin at the inch, and brand the vein on both sides until it appears when pressed; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then put the reed under it until it rises from the skin, and then lower it to the inch gently, then place another cloth above three digits; then brand the skin over the vein until it appears, then lower it to the reed, as you have done before, and lower it to another inch, as you did first; then cut a new size, or more if you need them, then lower it, and cut at the digit of the foot, then pull and lower until the second size; then remove size by size until it comes out completely, then put; and if you cannot pull and raise it, then insert a needle with a very strong doubled thread under it, and tie and pull, and place reed under it, and turn your hand from side to side until it is gone; and keep it from knotting, for if it knots, it cannot be pulled or raised, and this comes harmfully to the patient; and when you have entirely removed it, put wet cloth soaked in wine and rose oil over the place of the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it in a twisted manner, but do not cut it completely; and draw it out as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron tool used to cut the vein is curved, and you do not cut completely, so as not to cut the vein; it should be a large curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that lacks moisture; and by chance it may arise elsewhere than in legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from beneath the skin, as serpents and worms do, embedding themselves between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then the loins change, and the veins begin to come out, as if they were a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the loins are open, you must wrap around a piece of lint one and a half yards to two yards, and the thread, and leave the lint hanging from the leg, and every time there is none at the end, you wrap it again with the lint and the thread; and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining with it, but do not cut it at its root until it is fully out; for if you cut it, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess, putrefaction or swelling; because of which it must be treated little by little until completely removed. There are times when this vein, when treated, reaches five yards in length, or ten with one hand spanning about a foot, to me who received one from which it issued ten yards long, and when you cut it, you pull out one span or digit, and pierce it thoroughly so that all of it comes out; and empty the matter inside, and apply medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then cure it as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes there are main veins present, and especially when they appear in the joint of the foot or ankle, and there comes much bruising, and from which sprout main veins; treat them as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	verses that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often affects cattle, and is a small verse that grows between skin and flesh, and moves up and down throughout the body, feeling well as it travels from limb to limb, causing the skin wherever it goes to become inflamed and burst; and it is nourished by putrefaction of certain humors, coming from worms, serpents, and intestinal worms or parasites; and doubt is cast on its malignity, for when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot stop where it goes: therefore, you must tie the limb above and below with a tight rope, then cut and drain it. If the pus is fully in the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; the greater harm it does is that it can enter the eye, as we have said; if you see it coming or close to the eye, hold tightly below it with a strong cord, then cut and drain it. The patient must use cleansing of body from medicines soluble for the bad putrefied humors, and beware of meat causing infection through putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen those whom I say this of.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, as if live silver when it is cut from one piece to another; the pain left that part and stuck in the shoulder, and then a little while later spread through the entire body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that it returned to her torso, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered much how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease proceed in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	First, I wished very much that they could move the pain from their side to another place, but I did not wish it as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a cold body, and her veins were uncovered, and because the wind illnesses constrained appeared; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who have warm bodies and their veins are covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears as we have said, scrape off the surface and underneath hastily, and then wash away until that wind illness constrained at the place has gone; and cauterize the place. And if you do not see it with your eyes, treat it as those that drive wind illnesses, such as bitter pills, and snake root pills, and other similar ones.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows come in various types, according to their shapes and the parts of the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their types is that some have large points, small ones, hooked ones, and those fixed together; and some have two angles, while others have tongues, and some have pieces. And the one that falls into any limb does so in various ways: it may lodge in a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, thorax, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls into any part of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about later, appear: then you must be careful about extracting this arrow, for death often follows in various conditions; and when none of these bad signs appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, you should extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and a syphagma, which is above the brain, ruptures, is when there is scotoma and solidity and edema in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance this may be without force from the nostrils or ears; and by chance it affects speech and voice; and a discharge from the wound of moist white pus resembling a pulse, and similarly as if boiled meat; and if this sign appears to you, hold off on treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or hits the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; by chance the arrow may move like a pulse, and brings black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death ensues.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that cannot be removed by plumage is that without bubbles of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and warms up.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow drops into the covering of the foot, it affects the small bones; it causes great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow drops into the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with something undigested from the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow drops into the belly, and in its jump nothing but hay comes out through the intestinal tract, it has no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine spurts out and flows, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the hand and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the elbow and the thigh and the legs, and limbs similar to these, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell into the nerve at the root of the neck: I tried it, and removed it from another side beneath the ear fat, and he was cured without difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And draw out an arrow that fell into the grease of the eye beneath the paper, and the arrow was embedded, and could not be reached except by the point towards the wood, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, light as iron without ears; the patient recovered, and no bad accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I removed the barbs, and drew it out thoroughly, and the Christian recovered.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And drew an arrow from the man, that was in his chest or belly, and thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition at all; I incised the arrow, devised a method, drew it out forcefully, and he had no bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a person who has an arrow that fell or pierced the back, and the wound was stitched; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, nor caused any harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you see another person who has an arrow that fell into his face, and the wound was stitched; and remained thus suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow that struck a man of the king's court, who was hit among the straw, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely covered. I was called to treat it after it fell three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I made it with all my subtle skill, and did not feel it; and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed above the wound an ointment poultice digestive and antitoxic, because the eyes were swelling; and I saw the eye of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice by hand for days, and redressed the wound again, and the patient remained in such a state for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day beneath his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine by hand for days while the wound was open, and tried it, feeling the tip of the arrow rotting at the site; then I continued to treat the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent; and passed well through three months, after which I healed the wound so thoroughly that I could use tongs to extract it from both sides, but it would not come out; then I continuously innovated and devised various tools, until I successfully extracted it with properly made tongs on one day, as described in the form at the end of this chapter.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it, and the wound was sown, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or have I told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything; but master surgeons compare on very little matter, and on what is present and lacking, find nine operations, and nine instruments, for the removal of things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not enter into the limbs in two ways: either by the place where they enter or by another part; and that which enters through the place where it enters is an arrow penetrating the flesh, and does not enter even once now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it be left until the flesh rots entirely, and the issue is alleviated; and likewise if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, and change it each day; then it will come out, and if it does not come out, pierce through to all the subtle parts entirely, until the flesh inside is widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the other conditions I have clearly stated for the patient: do not draw it out at all, but let it be until it is equalized after a few days, because if the arrow comes just to the septum, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains without any bad accidents for several days, then the device to remove it should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed by force, I administer tar internally as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body so that it cannot be seen, then seek it with your hand throughout the wound; and if you feel it, remove it with an appropriate instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then enlarge the wound; and extract the arrow if you can, and if there are parts of the arrowhead that it holds, remove the flesh embedded on both sides until you can grasp it, and then break or bend the parts of the arrowhead to facilitate its removal; and with great care, ensure you do not break the arrow, as this would make its extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it stay until the flesh between the bones is rotten, then remove it, for the extraction would be painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes you do otherwise, apply what we have said about the treatment in this chapter; and beware of incising the nerve or the vein, and move skillfully to extract the arrow as soon as possible, either firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow fell on him, for that is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot do so, then position him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another direction, or where it opens anything of them, or the skin is swollen in such a way that one can see or feel it: cut there, as deep as the forceps can grasp, and then extract it: if it is now stuck.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it there, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is inside, push the whole shaft; and if the shaft falls, and you see that a thrust is needed, then use the hooked instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument; and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is stuck, then push the instrument with the point entering it, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary to cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or a fish or in the belly or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can reach it, then you may cut out; and guard against cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound if necessary; treat the wound until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to that of a bird's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are different sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the needle is also similar to that of a bird's feather, for piercing the tip of the arrow, as shown in its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for pressing and knowing this is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins from which we draw blood are thirty-one, of which sixteen are principal, namely: two jugulars which are behind the ears and called "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the temples and visible; and the veins that are in the lacrimal glands of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that runs through the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two subclavian veins which are around the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins through which we commonly bleed are as follows in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the median vein is called "fascia", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein lies on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the flexor, and it is the one through which we bleed, which clearly appears over the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the basilic vein is the vein that lies between the auricular and annular veins, and it has two sinuses; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of them lies below the bend of the arm on the left side, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nervosa" that is in the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The healing of veins that are behind the ears helps in purging old bile and in migraines; and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, are that you reset the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a screw so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two loops hanging from the head: hold them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, prick; then take the lancette, and make a cut beneath the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand all along the vein upwards, and cut away both the skin and the vein thoroughly twice through, and let out the blood until you see it; then drain it and bind it until it is healed; and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for migraines that have been around long, solid, and frequent headaches, and to the body of tears of water in the eyes; and the qualities of this health are as I say: and it is that the patient feels his neck strained so much that the two veins clearly appear; and you feel a pulse under your thumb, then sign with your third finger; then lift the heart over the vein upwards to your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upwards, and the flap, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then form it well, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about them regarding their application and their extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for flushing; and its quality is such that the patient's collar is drawn out by twisting, until the vein becomes visible; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's collar, and bind the vein until it is saneel, and only once the work is done or with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	In all ways, it is not fitting that the flames be too fierce; and apply the flame in a crosswise manner, for the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame might break the bone when it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps them, and with headache, and redness, and the orbit in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their health are such that the patient draws his colt from it by twisting at any ligament, as before; then the savior, and let the salvation through the traverse, a little long of flame a little wide, for there is no part of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance it breaks; then make flow of blood, as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein of the nose is good for water and strong poison, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the qualities of the health are such that the patient draws his colt by twisting at any ligament, then pulls his nose with your left hand, and take the subtle long flame, and stick it between the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well here, and the wound will begin to flow now; and do not go too perfectly, and make flow of blood according to your need, then tie it one night, for it is most easily restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The sinews of the two glands help in the narrowing of the artery, and in the beginning of atherosclerosis, and much to diseases, and to petechiae, and to erosion, and to herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the sinew is that the patient draws his collar away from both sides, as we have said; and let the master be above the patient's head, and let the patient lie on the seat, then heal the vein along a long bit widely, then draw temperate blood, or as much as needed; then do another part in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and compress all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke; and leave until morning, that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the sinews of the glands
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The veins of the lips above help in swelling in the mouth, and to the decay of gums, and cracks in the lips, and around the nose and between them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are such that it makes the patient sit facing you, and holds his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they can be known by their being black, and by having small black threads around them: cut both of them, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, cut the largest from each side, and do the same for the two veins above and below, for it is done in the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health above the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are above the tongue helps after the health of the cephalic vein, and it is in the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the uvea, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of this healer is that the patient's condition eases before your eyes in the sunlight, and it lifts the tongue, and you look beneath on each side a black vein: therefore, both are healthy, and do not proceed too much to perfection, for beneath them are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the ear that are commonly healed are treated in two ways: either by pricking with a sharp fine needle or with a subtle olive oil as you have heard, and it is called "aniseed"; and they are large and subtle according to the size and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the martyr's flame is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has need to open veins full of thick blood and apparent, and contain large and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle and pointed, and is for cleansing subtle veins, where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the lungs, and in the belly; and it is suitable for the physician to bleed his patient and to avoid the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and a bleeding continues, it must be stopped as I have said; and one should not prick with fire, but cut like a razor.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilique vein does not open clearly, it must be extracted, and another replaced; or you take any part of it, or make a new incision in its place: it will then open clearly; and cut with the fire like a razor, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the location of the vein, it must be thus that you extract the arm, touching the location until you feel the pulse; then mark the location with a pin or needle, and bind the arm, cutting the vein with fire like a razor; and beware that you do not pierce the artery when you see the area swelling, for this is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bulge up high as urine in a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that it is a vein of the artery: then hasten, and place your finger longwise, then withdraw your finger when the veins have stopped, for this often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move it the patient until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the veins are not stopped, and it pains you, and medicines are not at hand, cut the vein if it opens, for the head of the shoulder is withdrawn; stop the veins.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark from the fig tree, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well just to the other day; if the veins are stopped, that is good; if not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stoppages are not grievous for many conditions of the small wound, and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm during treatment to draw blood from above the hand and beneath the body, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and the patient must guard against the nerve underneath, and if pricked too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the health is damaged, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, you must anesthetize the vein with the instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein helps in drawing blood from the hand and aids the eyes; and it must be treated by pricking with an olive oil flame or a mirtin oil flame, for this is the most safe of all veins, as it does not have any nerve or artery underneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In all ways, it is necessary to seek the lightest touch, and not harm anything if it must be done for the first time, and one recommences; and by chance, swelling occurs in some people's joints when it must be done for the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about a wound is that it is not induced except to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses; and the wound should be treated in one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should treat the wound at the beginning of prayers on bended knees, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and one should treat the wound on the first or third day after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The medicine that is administered for diseases has no fixed hour determined, but rather when need is of day or night, at all hours and in all times; and it is not fitting to give medicine to children up to fourteen years, nor to women carrying a fetus from four months up to seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Medicine should not be given to the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be medicated, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that they purge their intestines with a light enema, if they have retained much fluid, so that the veins do not attract from the intestines the superfluous putrid matter harmful to the principal limbs; and medicine should not be given to one who is too salty from meat, nor to those who are drunk to excess, nor to dropsies. And when war is undertaken to medicate after colic, passion, vomiting, belly discharge, and frequent sexual intercourse, labor, watching, and fasting, and those whose entire virtue, whether by arms or body; then the subtlety of the humors, if the vein is large due to meat, drink, and medicines, you may have the power to thin it. And between bath, if any such thing does not prevent it, to subtilize the blood, and medicate from the vein near the third toe as we have said; and keep that day free of work, of labor, and of lust, and similar things; and be bound and loosed, and let the sayer be higher than he who is being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then slightly restrain the ligature above, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot properly take hold. And then rub the limb with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them; then grease the sayer's flame with a bit of old oil, then place his thumb on that vein under the limb at the spot he wishes to medicate, ensuring the vein does not become engorged or fail to take.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as cords in the veins, and some that are full of windiness, such that when one applies fire, they retreat from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one belongs to those; and if one incises the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which one must be cautious about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein incised opens on the first attempt, that is good; but if not, one must incise again a little below or above quickly, where the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient feels better, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps abscesses will form; do not enter a bath, and then resume the incision if you wish to continue; and if the wound is small, or the vein is shallow and you doubt whether there is as much blood as you see, then apply fire directly to that opening; work quickly, before the limb becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swollen, do not begin healing it anew, and place a bit of oil jelly on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and makes the jelly that the oil becomes; thus administer the oil jelly in each wound that you heal the veins, to staunch the flow of blood; and similarly make tar and bowen from it when you put it on the limb; so subtlely does the blood separate when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, even when the wound is not cleansed more than that time or the opening of the vein is small, you should hasten, and place on the limb a wet sponge in water and salt a bit warm, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood from the vein has drained out. And if any black or green remains on the limb after some days, it does not harm it; and if you see it, place on it something of aloes or myrrh moistened in calamus juice, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance on the skin of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find it soft under the pressure of the hand, that is a bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not apply anything of what we have said, for fear it may cut into the artery; but dress it with a dry poultice to harden the wound, and then treat with other salves until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it large, let it flow until it becomes fine; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for one who is full and fat, and has need of blood extraction, that a larger wound be made, and let the flanges be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and make him heal little but often, and should heal him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing is saved from haemorrhage and nerve compression, and is better than long or wide wounds.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose body needs nourishment during healing, it is fitting to give them soft bread with pomegranate juice; if they are heated, let them bleed 3 or 4 times. And if they have a cold complexion, let them eat soft bread before healing in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it swells in the arm, after the discharge of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it swells and becomes sore in the arm, and has swollen before, when it is weakened by great swelling, it is fitting that he be allowed to swell a little and a little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if it swells in the arm after the first swelling, and he has a strong cor, he should swell seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if it swells in another place, he should swell on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and this causes fever; it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the hole until it closes up in the pampson; after you have rewarded all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on your pulse when it has healed, so that death does not come from the pampson; and this happens many times, when the healers are negligent; and it is not fitting when you see release the arm, and let blood a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firmly upon it; nor if it is crooked, that you extend the arm hastily, for this would be bad; but let it alone until it has healed a second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the one who is frozen reaches the circumference of the vein hole and comes out, and place on it a little salt moistened in water, and press gently upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess is pacified.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need arises to treat the blood a second time, let it be done in that same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein in the hand because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of treating it is as follows: the patient should hold their hand in warm water until the veins become red; then tie it moderately so that the vein appears clearly. Now treat it through the vein, not by length or width; and make the punctures wide, and suture well close to the joint of the hand. If no blood can come out, put the hand back in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; if it is in winter, do not hold the hand in warm water again because it should be used more in summer than in winter; and the treatment of this vein is safer than any other vein, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The cure for the healing of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: stretch the hand, and put it in warm water until the veins are swollen, if one can see them; and if the vein is across, and you cover it entirely, do not harm anything; and do not go too long perfoming, for the nerve is underneath all entirely naked of flesh, and then put the hand in warm water again, if the skin is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn enough blood as needed, put a piece of wool and salt on the vein to quickly seal it, and do this for each limb.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The cure for the vein in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse (likely referring to a hernia), and do everything as I have said for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the throat is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the lungs, retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its remedy are that the patient pours hot water on it, and rubs it over the vein until it swells, and ties it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot goes much fluid from the reins; therefore, apply the remedy to the larger vein or at the ankle where it moves well.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you remedy it on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and treat them as you would cut through them; let the flamed asbestos be ready.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the wound cannot issue from it, set the foot in the water, and let it well empty the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wound needs it for the first time, begin again the second time a bit above, because the loam is salty; nor doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus do with the sponge of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The loam of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its wound values for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its wound is such that the patient enters the bath, and expels four doles above the ankle by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you can sain it in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is best to cop it, for the loam is clear, and it is very responsive to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, cleanse any vein that appears on the side or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let the bleeding continue as much as you see, and then untie the bandage, and place a cotton pad and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is performed in two ways: either with fire or without fire; and the suction performed by pricking and extracting blood is done at fourteen places on the body, of which one is placed entirely over the head; another is inserted into the neck; two are placed on both sides of the neck; one suction cup is below the chin; one is placed on both shoulders; one is placed above the armpits; and the other cups are placed between both arms and both legs. And this suction does not draw blood, but only small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because it weakens none of them as much as a vein from a puncture would; and it should not be administered with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess, until the entire body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for custom, we conduct it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between and in every time; for there are such who, when they need to bleed, have heavy head; and such who find fullness and redness in their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes; and such who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and reek of blood; and there are such who dream, and see by night blood and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially if it is between the hours, we order to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sinews of the muscle help in the healing of the fracture of the head... that comes to them, and it should not be that this happens after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventosation is in the place of the sinew of the cephalic, and it should not be used by those who have a cold complexion, or who have chyltrary, for it does them much great harm; because of this it should not be used by those who watch, nor those who have cold illnesses of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often suffers from this, becomes more forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the cupping slightly lower due to the fear of increased forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventosation on the neck is in the place of the sinew of the head and the basilica. Because of this, it is effective for narrowing of the pulse, for splitting the channel of the arm, and for immediate relief and fullness; and it should be applied only briefly, for if it is held too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind disorders affect the two ribs of the neck and cause pain in the head, eyes, and ears, and are located in the healthy part of the basilica; and you must instruct the patient to place his hand when he puts it on, not to compress the artery, and avoid hemorrhage.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wind disorders over the chin cause mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases in the mouth; and are located in the healthy parts of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind disorders of the shoulders cause diseases that come from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind disorders of the groins are as affected by three veins of the arm, because they receive blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is bare of muscle, and one can feel nerves and arteries beneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping device placed on the buttock treats hemorrhoids from below and internal diseases, and it must be large, made of iron, well-treated; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and I make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cups for the legs cure openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are effective for old pains in the kidneys, liver, and bladder, and diminish tumors; and they are placed on the inner and outer ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, and bring about paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping device is as follows: first, ensure it is empty and thoroughly warmed, then place it hastily, and move it evenly without stopping until you see the skin turn red and swollen, indicating the blood's appearance. Then remove it, put on the cups again, and pay attention to the condition of the body, for some have thick flesh and clear pores: in such cases, only need to prick once, creating large wounds but not too deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it must be pierced twice: the first time to dilate the path of the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it must be pierced three times; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we need to dilate it only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, we must begin often; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it thoroughly, and the ends are such that the vessels are cut suddenly, and for those with thick skin and hardness, and who have small pores, you should anoint the eyes of the suction cups with a pungent and dissolving oil: if it is in heat, use olive oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in cold, use mustard oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take ambergris oil, or balsamite oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is being healed has flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to put oil, but he should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or pear water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, let them rise from juniper, or cedar water, or myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or decoction of safflower, or infusion of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not appropriate to heal with suction cups before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two. And do not sleep after ventilation, and he must be warm when he should be suctioned and when he is suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch that one who is healing and is choleric, and if the blood is too acrid and inflamed; it must take cold things, as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at mealtime, and similar things; and eats grubs, and flesh of castrated animals, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, must take syrop of honey, and moderate fragrant wine between evening and morning, and eats little, and eats grubs and small birds and pigeon; and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men treacle or mace before or after cupping to strengthen the principal members; and let the blood be diluted, but it must not be given to those who are hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed without piercing are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and mouth and veins and hip, for these limbs do not tolerate being pierced at their roots, and fire is made use of only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place them on the nipples when a child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and mouth to alleviate the limb; and removes pain, when there is inflammation or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue incidentally the inflammation, or dislodges the stone from its place; thus does it when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suckle only; sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with tepid water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a manner one fills the suction cup with warm boiled water or water with certain herbs cooked in it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two inches wide and half a palm in depth, and have or make a small hole in the middle to insert a needle, as for piercing an acupuncture point, and may it be made of tin, with the mouth open so that the patient does not become cold when placed on the limb; and have in the middle a cross bar of tin or iron to hold a wick, and let there be both large and small ones according to the diseases and the sensitivity of those who use them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and of thin people from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one should place this suction cup on the limb: take the wax or resin wick, and insert it into the suction cup through the cross bar that is in the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the patient; then put it on the limb, and let your two fingers be on the hole as we have said, so that when you want to, the vapor goes out, and remove the suction cup; and immediately insert the wick as before, and do this often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is applied in diseases of the pleura, for all acute conditions, it has neither a peg nor holes, and is not applied forcefully unless it is filled with fluid, and is placed only on the limb; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suction cups are not applied forcefully only in places where it is impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on naked flesh, such as the palms or soles, and others like them; and the quality of the user is that when you find suction cups that are in clear, sweet water without corruption, take them; and put one nut in sweet water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their centers; and then bleed by vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place the suction cups on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where you can put a suction cup, apply one, for this is very useful.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not so, lift the arm from the armpit, and then with water, very well, and then press it out; and if the arm is too swollen after the body's veins, make a cold linen bandage, and put it on until the flesh is infected; and if there are many abscesses, put broken vitriol or garlic, and similar things, until they are infected; or you put on half of peeled beans, and let them remain until they dry out at the arm, and will now stop bleeding.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the abscesses do not will to take, rub the arm with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the abscess flows out, and then put bandages on it. As soon as they smell the blood, they will dry out; and when you see that they are beginning to heal, sprinkle a little aloes and powdered salt or ashes on them, and they will now start to heal.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear friend, that the knowledge in this chapter did not appear in any of the ancient books or letters; and for this reason, the science has been lost in our land. For I found nothing good in it; and I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, in which I studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life. And I have described here what is contained, abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must state in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise ones place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains come to any person, it is necessary for you to hasten to heal the patient from both sides, if nothing else constrains you, such as bodily weakness, illness, or age; or if his hand is either too cold or too hot; and let him consume cold herbs, that is, cold jujubes, and meat of bird and chervil, and drink no wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not overeat food that fills the veins with blood until you have doubt of a hot abscess or the spreading of matter in the limb; so the patient returns to sound prior governance he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it must be nourished with meats that promote good healing or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, meat of fowl, oysters, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And in good nourishment, the healing is shown and the fractures are healed more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones in the old and decrepit cannot heal or set well according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset over the broken bone with strong tendons which will connect the limb together, so long as it enforces itself as it was before; and do not let it set completely from its work, and for this reason, you must nourish with good meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go across, and others that occur obliquely, just like the cuts of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place. And the fracture of the bone is known by the twisting of the limb, and clearly by palpation and by touching; and when there is no twisting or pain on touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there may be no fracture; but it can well have a twist, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move it by hand, but place medicines that follow here, and then hold now delicately.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break going in an arc, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now put them together equally, as with abscesses that come to head; and if yellow abscesses come, let it remain a day, until the abscesses be calmed; then set it equal to the bone that you can lightly and safely touch, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold as follows hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, set them from two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or by your hand if it is a small limb, or by two strings, or one string and by your hand; and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you reduce all additions in their places on the bone that you can, and guard that through your work there come no injury nor pain to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems not quite right: dress it beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly or press it as those who bring about a hot abscess and contraction to the limb through their work, as we have often wished.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at point, well chastise the patient so he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and see to it that the limb be so secured that no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at point, and it must be put in proper disposition so that no pain is felt; and take care that it be set straight, so that twists do not occur when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For it is that small limbs, such as arms and thighs and similar: it must be wrapped in soft, fine linen; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: they must be wrapped in a wide, firm bandage, for the wide bandages encircle all of the large limb and constrain it equally, so there is no gap; then tie over with light stops, three or four times according to the limb, and gently tighten your hand around the entire bandage, then go above the break and constrain less, that the break may move a little away from the break; and soften the bandage little by little, until you perceive a large part of the healthy area, then take the other bandage, and wrap again over the broken area; then return to the part below the break, and constrain moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above; then place stops of linen or cloth evenly, so they are all equal, then tie everything over the bandage, and put your well-made pads on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something that cools and alleviates the abscess, and allows it to subside for a few days; then strip away the outer layers, which should be half as wide as a large cane reed, or from wood used for making splints, or palm ribs, and cut them according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it must be that the strips which one puts on the fracture are a little wider and larger than the others; and should be as long as is necessary for the size or length of the limb. Then bind over the strips just as you did at the first application, then tie over with a suitable thread, just as in the first application over the fracture. The threads must be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax. For if the threads are too thick, like those from leaves that make their bindings with twisted linen cord, this is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each strip.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of arrows after the closure in their healthy places, then place lint or a linen bandage over them so that they do not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is burned and the tendons are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to extract arrows from all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to insert arrows forcefully on the first day; rather, do so after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of an acute abscess developing. And see here the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture not too thin nor too thick. This is the common way of using such a plaster to restore fractures in many conditions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 ounces of bryony and mandrake and hellebore and asafetida and arabic gum and mugwort, 10; myrrh and frankincense, 5; aloes, 9; make them into a powder, and mix with honey from an egg; if the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster for twists: take mugwort and wormwood, 10; myrrh and aloes, 9; amber, 6; armeniac bark, 10; grind well, and mix with water or honey from an egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for plasters on joints and bones severed from their places, and alleviates the pain that comes with it, as well as the cutting of the bone, and the breaking: take new wool, and mix fat from swine and cooked oil, and apply to the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly removes pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for making a plaster to heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for making a plaster to heal bone fractures and to reduce the swelling of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of visvalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetches; of each part one; grind them and mix with wine; if the members are heated, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster stronger than the first, when an abscess hardens during the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of visvalve, and seeds of flax, centaury, chamomile, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile; of each take one part; grind them and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras stated in his book that one should not apply anything on the broken limb to restore strength that cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he said it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one should apply on the broken limb things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster useful for injury and pain: take mallow and hemp from combed flax, or bird feathers, and vinegar, and salt, and grind them together, and make a plaster of it and apply it where needed.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove it after some time, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has moved the bone from its place; do not remove it with your hands just yet. If pain comes to the area, or itching, with no relief or swelling, hasten, and remove it, and take off the plaster now; and use a light cloth and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area as long as the itching ceases and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly enough until you are sure of the warm abscess; and subdue the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the fine binding and a little plaster, but do not tie it as tightly as before; and continue this subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has become empty and redness and pain and swelling have all been removed, and you need to apply a plaster and bandage, then renew it as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if none of what we have said comes to the member, and it is not dislocated after three or four or five or seven days; and once in a while let it remain for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the broken ends harden and approach the setting of the bone; then restrain it more than at first, and allow it to grow its flesh as I said before; and if you see that the place is drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; immerse the wound in hot water several times when you dislocate it, and let it dry a little each third day; by this work therefore cut off the nourishment to the member, and mend hastily what the foolish menders do, which leave the member crooked: that is bad, and such works are fearful, and I see nothing else but letting and properly working on it.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Of various ways of breaking, and diverse figures, and the causes are destined; for there are breaks made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck fractures all the bone just beneath the bone, as does a hedgehog or a club; and because of this, this way of breaking is called "hedgehog" or "club.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this way of breaking is called "absolute"; it includes wounds from these two kinds of breaks, large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a compressed percussion, or a fracture of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar ones.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture close enough to the tissue beneath the bone, or upon the bone itself, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as finely as hairs, and the crack is small, and because of this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, causes a piece of bone to enter downward, and the swelling of the hairs is like those of a smith when he strikes on cauldrons; so the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or chief moist bones, as in children; and it happens in all these kinds of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all manner of breaks through their subtraction, and by examination with tests, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known by this: when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, the black breaks become apparent.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient's condition. If you see any harmful symptoms such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paralysis, fever, and the eyes becoming protruded and red, and other similar symptoms due to various conditions, it may not heal with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the pain comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the moon.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone becomes corrupt, and the accidents that we have said come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes just to the tissue that covers the brain, then it is fitting that you split the fractured part in such a way: and you must take hold of the end of the injured patient's head, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and more so over the figure of the wound. And if bleeding from the bone comes with uncovering the bone, or an abscess is formed, then aid as necessary, and it is that you fill the space with moistened cloths in olive oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are pacified, and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin splitting the bone to remove, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut precisely at the front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then we cut another larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron rod; and work lightly, so as not to blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it through and through, as when making incisions with trephines, not fully but so that the point does not pass beyond the bone of the skull, and should have a margin or circle above the point, preventing it from passing beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each comes to its place in the thickness of the bone, and you should have trephines for all skulls; and this is the form of the three kinds of trephines.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing through the broken bone are that you place the probe on the bone, and turn it to your two sides until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the probe a little bit to another part, and do this all around, then cut between the pertu with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the punctures, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools you have such as tongs, forceps; and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the sinew.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the displacement which has remained from the bone to all other similar instruments, but it must be more tense and more subtle than the other incisors; and if there remains nothing of the small bones or any scales, you should remove them gently with the tools; then treat the wound with powders and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galien said, who describes it as more simple; and he speaks very forcefully, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break has opened wide, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this incisor a lens-like object, the form of which is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and let the damaged part be on two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently crack the bone all around, and take great care of the membrane beneath; if it is rough against the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed very harmfully and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must scrape beyond that roughness and remove the scales with a fine razor, in which you should have various quantities, to apply the most suitable part in each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you start with large razors and then use finer ones, and continue until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other small incisions and subtle fractures, you must apply the remedy according to its nature; and this is something that is not covered by him who devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the face is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and ointment in rose oil, and apply it to the wound; then take another doubled cloth two or three times over, and ointment in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not burden the face, then administer above the other ligature, and do not strain it too much that it touches the wound only; and leave it for one or two days, until the abscesses are calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, mustard flour, incense powder, aromatic, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and administer above it unguents without mordanting; and guard that the wound is kept clean, that you do not leave ointment, nor allow fluid to congeal on the brain fabric, for when liquid congeals on the head cloth, it runs down and causes great harm to the patient; for when one puts something biting on the face, nerves are affected above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take note, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if night comes only because of the medicine we have put on, that it has virtue, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and in gum one rag, and lay it on the sore; then cure it in the manner of cures that it should be healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts above the neck are broken, or only one of them, for these are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and neither breaks nor causes pain by bending or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is fitting that you place your little finger or thumb from the newborn on the equal part of the break and fit it into your index finger, and into the pocket behind it, so that the break regains its natural figure; and do this gently, and see that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nose and your finger cannot reach the place, it is fitting that you put it equal to the end of a slightly thickened finger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is on both sides, do the same to the other side, and hasten to restore the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are healed, then place your finger at the end of the nose with linen threads, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you place it from another side, where the break is; let the tents be so large that they fill the pores of the navel.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And any restorer says that we should moisten the tents with butter and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is very good, but the tents should be moistened with a preparation of egg white and flour of wheat; then leave the tent on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes place goose quills in the wound instead of tents, and cover with a dressing, and if the break is severe, let the patient blow through it; do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form on the nose while you are working on it, apply a cloth or a moist cotton pad in rose oil, or with a little iodine.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess forms on the nose, apply a poultice from above, made of silkworm silk powder and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk. Then place light stoppers on it, and do not bind the nose; and if the nasal fracture is small and broken into small pieces, extract it using suitable instruments, then stitch the wound and treat the tissue and bones with appropriate poultices and ointments. And if there are no wounds inside the nose, treat it with linseed compresses until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound, and the break is open merely, not shattered into pieces, but rather cleft internally, one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is in the right part of the jaw, you should place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left mandible, you should use your right hand to gently insert your index finger into the break, and close it with the other hand by pressing from outside.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is separated into two parts, you should apply extensions to both parts, making them equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs or a rupture, strain them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place a dressing on the broken jaw and put a double bandage over it; place on this one a well-made pad or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, and attach it securely. Instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, release it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; apply a plaster with powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour after you have removed the dressing; put light wool over the plaster, and if the plaster dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; often it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses form, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward any fragment of the bone that has been removed; so subtle in removing with instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flamed irons according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these fragments, and there remains none, close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters over it to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the forcele
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The shoulder is fractured many times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is of three kinds: either it is broken and separated into two parts, with one piece, which is the easiest to reset; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is as follows when the fracture has no wound: you should have two assistants, one holding the shoulder that feels the fractured bone, and the other extending the arm toward the proper part; then place the fracture evenly between your two hands so that the shape is as it should be, with neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place a round pad of cloth or wool over the shoulder on the patient; make it as large as necessary. Then gently lift and support the shoulder, holding the pad with your hand so that you can place the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder downward, because it comes from the front, then it is necessary for the patient to lie often on his side, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and order the attendants to lower the shoulder, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then attend to the break with your fingers, and if you find fragments, you must split them; and draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any protrusion, then use one of your incisors; but place this instrument under the shoulder to prevent it from shifting.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not misplaced, and should be as wide as it suits, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the rupture of the wound you made when drawing the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, drain the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess is hot and swollen, I wrap it in rose oil and vinegar, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The setting of the bone, when it is felt due to wounds or cuts, is that you place on the bone a plaster of flour and egg powder, and put light bandages over it, and place a sphere under the splint if needed; then take a very wide cloth about a palm in width, and place the folded cloth over the bandage, and apply the plaster; next, take a thin stick about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that cloth, so that the ends of the cloth hang out; and place the stick on the splintered area, and turn the cloth up to the neck, under the splint, and over the healthy part, and the injured part; and bind each part well, and when you see that the ligatures hold the splintered area properly, and clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligatures loosen, release them; and have the injured lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the splint to raise the shoulder; this will alleviate the force of the injury by the support of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until any bad accidents occur, up to twenty days; then reapply the plaster if needed, and bind and leave it as such until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days in most cases, and sooner for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When it comes to the breaking of the shoulder or large bone, and neither side is broken in the middle, nor is it out of place due to external force; adjust the joint according to the figure of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in all ways you can; then apply powder of the mill with abundant egg, wrapped lightly, and place a double flag over it. Next, put on a broad and thin strap slightly wider than the shoulder, ensuring there are no movements anywhere in the shoulder. If necessary, use linen stoppers to secure it evenly; then tightly bind it with a large bandage so that the strap does not move from its place, and check the ligament each day; whenever it swells, rebind it, and adjust the strap if it is out of position, and have the patient lie on their side. The shoulder will be healed in twenty or twenty-five days. When these numbers are completed, release it, for it is not bone that can be set lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone tends forward and out of the shoulder, cut it off, and do what we have said in breaking the collarbone to treat a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from breaking the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is broken in the middle only sometimes, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends outward, and the patient feels great pain, as well as swelling. Immediately, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movement in the broken bones becomes obvious, and everyone can see it well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that when the patient lies on their back, place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs at your hands, carefully making all parts equal so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply poultices and ointments above the fine saline or other light substance, and wrap them in a cloth, securing them over the broken bone so they do not move. Twist the bandage round the back, adjust it appropriately, and rewrap it every hour; if it becomes loose, tighten it. If it is necessary to loosen it due to corrosion or itching at the site, pain, or an abscess, act quickly, loosen it, remove the poultice, and treat the area as in regular healing; then replace the bandage and keep it tight until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaking of the ribs comes from force applied behind the shoulder and at the back, and they bend due to their gappiness; and one feels this well upon examination along the sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The resetting is that you align the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is turning inward, the patient feels intense pain and puncture-like sensations, similar to those from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; it causes spasms, and immediately vomits large amounts of blood, which is a serious health issue. The elderly have had to use great skill in treating this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is fitting to give foods that swell the belly to administer, to expel the burning sensation.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make such incisions that abscesses form if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that we should apply suction cups to the shoulder to draw out the swelling, and this seems reasonable. However, there is doubt that the suction cup will attract the superfluous fluids to the shoulder due to the weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that we should cover the shoulder with wetted wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the duration equal, then it should be treated with a pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone where the tendons are torn, and there is doubt for the patient, it is necessary to incise over the place of the broken rib, and one must put something under the instrument to guard against leakage; then one must cut the bone, and operate gently, and afterwards suture the two edges of the wound if it is large, and apply plaster dressings until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses continue to come up, put moist cloths in rose oil, and apply them to the rib; and treat continuously the rib as is fitting for an abscess, and let him lie on his side where it should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know whether they will be healed or not, if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they can move and feel well when you hold and prick them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will recover if proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether they will be healed or not, if you see that the patches are softened, and if the accidents in the hands, and on the back due to wind and involuntary evacuation; and when one has sovined it over their belly, there is an involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is treated on its back and it wishes to heal, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is mortal: if it does not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply an espinea orroise (a spine from a rose) or oil from an egg if there is a hot abscess. Keep it applied until it calms down; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage. Instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is fractured, it must be treated on the heart; remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, if large, with suturing, and apply an ointment promoting flesh growth until healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," you should hold your left hand's pouch with your right hand, placing it evenly within your reach, then put the plaster and bandage on, if needed; then bind it. If there are fractured bones, make an incision, remove them, and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the hip bone is fractured, and if it is, there may be a slight alleviation at the head; make a long incision, and angle downward to the buttocks, and cause pain, swelling, and discoloration at the fracture site.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the wounding instrument; and know which are the wounds and their form; and if the wound is only on the head, so place an equal wound to it, as it be in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the wound is long, or it declines inward, so lie the patient on their stomach, as the restoration of that wound matches you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it equally, apply a plaster, then place a stick or reed stake above, and bind the wounding instrument so that it does not move; and fill the area under the armpits, as the bandages should be equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses begin to form, do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and hold as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires are those between the scapula and the head of the shoulder. If they are broken, you must restore them according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a stick of medium size, as shown in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two shoulders with two ligatures, and tighten them up high, and place the patient on the seat; then throw his broken arm onto the beam until it comes to the armpit, and have half a piece of wood in it, then place any heavy thing or the attendants above; then set the blades of the breaker equal with their hands together, so that the breaker returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that one supports the patient on his stretcher, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands two attendants that one hold what is on the breaker with their hands, and the other hold below the ligature, extending each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, tighten the ligature below the breaker and above it, and extend each of the attendants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it must be that you place the middle line over the axilla, and the other one toward the knife, under the break; and also if the break is opposite the knife, you must place the line lightly, without effort, until the break is equal on the bone and on the knife; then set the break equally as it should be, and bind it, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, you must not bind it tightly for seven days, and place a moistened piece of wool in oil on the axilla and in rose oil, until the abscesses are appeased; then bind it, and the way to bind it is that you apply the plaster over the break, then assemble the arm over the aid, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and bind over the aid and over the arm, so that the arm is in the position of stakes, unless any thing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use wedges, and place one larger and stronger wedge on either side of the fracture, with two finger-widths of space between each wedge, making sure each wedge is large enough to span three finger-widths on both sides; then pry with the wedges as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the fracture, more forcefully but not by pulling apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the wedges and the tightness, as we have said, in the hour that you reduce the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it remain until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each three days the healing, to ensure there is no itching or swelling at the site, or that new growths do not appear on the limb because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the remedy, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents happen, and the dislocation is not reduced after three days or more, let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; put under the shoulder a cushion filled with evenly cut wool, and observe every hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the tendons do not become软化; by the virtue of medicine, it will heal, and let him eat the meat we have mentioned before, in such a way that the meat be first tenderized; when it begins to heal, make it more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be reduced within forty days entirely; then one must reset them and administer baths and ointments to treat them.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and bound up, it must remain to be untied for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fascicle," of which one is small and is that which follows the pouch; and the other is large, and is that which is beneath, opposite the small one; by chance it breaks only the large fascicle, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fascicle is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing is better; and when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and worse than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small fragile bone that is broken only, then it needs to be gently extended and kept in alignment.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, then it needs to be stretched more forcefully; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross their hands over themselves, with the cushion in front higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the attendants' arms to the part below their hand, or to the armpit, and another attendant above the other.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the bones in alignment, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its proper place. And if there is any detached part that cannot be grasped and restored to its place, then make an incision and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the cauterizer for wounds, I have spoken of it in the single chapter; so take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, make a poultice of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the cloth tightly so that the abscesses are eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the poultice, and apply the plaster of the powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg, then place the bandages, and let the bandage from the cauterizer be more firm, and a bit wider than the others; and know that there should be six bandages or arms in various positions: whether the cauterizer is in one of the bones, or two; and apply it more tightly over the cauterizer than elsewhere, and less throughout the day as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths above the cauterizer be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the threads from which they are made be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the binding. If the ligaments have become soft and the bones displaced, address accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you notice that the wounds cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you loosen it a little and leave it for a few days, until the wounds heal, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said happen to the patient, do not dislocate beyond twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or in the meantime, then place his hands at his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, according to the mixtures and compositions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and near the knuckles, dislocations occur only rarely, but many times they become swollen.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or swollen, the patient should keep their foot straight in front of them, equal on both sides. Then place their hand on an extended board, and stretch the broken bones, setting them equally aligned until they are well jointed. Apply the plaster and ointments if no abscesses occur, then put a bandage according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the heel between the sole of the foot and the leg, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to his injured heel; then wrap with a long piece of cloth, and let the pad of cork be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as it should.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the foot, it is necessary to place a pad above and one beneath in the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and secure the bandage between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our fingers, if they are broken, set them equal, as they should; and bind with the palm, and if you see that a small pad straightly placed can hold the fracture still, do so; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, set them equal, and tie with the healthy finger that follows; or you may bind all together, keeping them from moving, or place a pad above, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back; and the restoration is done by ligating above the break and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their side, then each minister extends their ligature to their part equally; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one ligature on the side of the knife, and the other ligatures below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then place the ligatures below the knee, and extend downwards; then set the bone equally with both hands, so that it matches its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and the ligature, unless abscesses appear.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first before returning to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap the blister with a doubled bandage three or four times, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the heels are at the root of the knee, and place a long thread between the thigh and the leg, beneath the knee inside, and follow the end of the thread above; then turn back to the leg and thigh with the bandage, and put a strip over the blister; then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to ensure equal tightness, and begin to tie in three or four turns around the blister; and as you go higher from the blister, the tighter it should be; then attend to the two ends of the thread that you placed between the leg and thigh, and place three strips above them, then return beneath to the end of the thread, until you see below the foot; and tie tightly so that it does not move in its place, and leave it like this, until no blister, swelling, or other similar condition occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, loosen it and adjust what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it must be washed, if one can; and if one cannot, it must be cut open, and the force removed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the thigh broken when we set it as with the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in the restoration thus made, the patient does not suffer.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in about seven days, or somewhat fewer or somewhat more, according to the differences in constitution.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it fractures, it is not merely a crack or hole, but results in all wounds and sore injuries, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one should set what is sound to its place as much as it can be assembled; then apply the plaster, and put a round splint if you need it, and bind it as it should be. Then re-establish all the dispositions we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar cases; apply to each accident what is suitable until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by its proper name "moustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and it breaks entirely as it does in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is equally as that of the arm, and the works are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the finer bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and it turns outward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and bind the straps equally; but nevertheless, if the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, the extension should be lesser and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two sticks of well-chosen wood that correspond to the length of the leg from one side to the other, and let them be as long as from the knee down; then wrap in two layers a bandage over and under, and tie in the middle thus, and at this place neither will the leg decline to right nor to left, and so it is well; and none administer a belt of length along the leg, and it is of wood, and one places the leg to guard against movement, and properly done is this in the break or where there is an injury; and move each day the leg, to see if there is any abscess hot nor another accident; so cure until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle no breakage comes about, but in the bones of the foot there is sometimes a break and in the toes, and there does not arise strength beyond multiple dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones sticking out one over the other, put the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to walk, and then place your foot above its foot where the bones are raised, pressing it until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and stoppers, and put a small board with two heads under the sole of the foot, then bind it properly to the foot. After you have wrapped it tightly with bandages and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, unbind the ligature, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length, making it slightly wider. Place the pad under the finger as I have said, and secure it properly. And if there are two or three or more broken fingers, place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and secure the pad under the finger. Let it be positioned over the head of the pad towards the palm of the hand, so that it well covers the finger.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breakers, as we have said; and assist each accident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone at the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the natural hand is broken, make her sit elevated, then incline it to the part of the back, and hold her by the rear. Then fill the space in nature with cotton, making it as large as the bone. Then remove the woman, and lift the back little by little, so that the cotton comes to the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the bone. And when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, doing this for seven days or so: the break will be restored. If you wish, use a bladder from a birch tree, tie a string to the hole, and fill the entire bladder inside; then blow into the string forcefully until the bladder is swollen within: nature will return the break. Then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken in a man or woman, restore it as we have said for the thigh bone; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and understanding, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks signify in many dispositions the right way of restoration: understand this accordingly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the thigh into it; then wrap it with bandages around, and let it be for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has a break with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, to be treated now, as our treatments testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, treat it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart healing the injury at that same hour, or on that day, if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if no abscesses come, continue the healing until a new day, as long as the abscesses are appeased. Do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered side, you must place it gently in position with your hands, maintaining a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to make it equal with your hands, you must reset it with an instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight lengths, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this purpose, you need a probe that needs to be three or four in diameter, depending on what it needs for each treatment of a fracture; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and it should be sharp at the front, and thick in the middle forward, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", which means that the curved heads of the bone should be placed on the head of the apparent bone; and fix it once, so that it returns, and let them be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must shape the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then shape the head of an appropriate instrument, such as a rasp or chisel, to your power; then cut away what remains in the bone due to hardness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do this while it is in its place, then moisten I with a wine tincture of ink, and properly if it is sooted; and do not place anything over the wound dressed or another thing where there may be an opening, that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer leeches when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not compressed with the breakage; and often the foolish have done this, and caused harm or death or corruption to the patient at some time; and let the compressions be softer and less tight than other wounds.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that some evil accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not fitting to place leeches on it; but wrap around it, in place of leeches, with hard bandages, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days swelling in the wound, remove what you have put on for vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetropharmakon ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb must be aligned in such a manner that the swelling flows down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the swelling does not subside, you should know that there are small pieces of bone. Therefore, you must clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the head, or any other kind of corruption, it must be treated, according to what he states in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open in the same limb, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade, and others similar in the large limbs, do not treat it immediately, for often death ensues, but let it remain until it rots; by chance it may fall out after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come over the seam
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see bruises after the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to behold the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot allow the limb to perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, when the wound is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and gum acacia, with acaicia, and other similar substances, that you may use any of these things or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine or abundant egg white or with cheese; place them on the wound in stoppers, and bind well, without loosening by hand for days; then remove it, and replace another until the nodes are removed; or apply over a well-made piece of lint; for the properties of lint are such that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the node has already turned to hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cover with a poultice, and let the excess appear; or you may refer it to any barber until it is removed, and then treat until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a limb that is weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	when the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after the limb is weak and delicate, it happens for many causes: one of which is because it was tied too tightly and not as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, preventing the nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or because of too great movements, not at their proper time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and cause the body to grow tender, until the veins are multiplied within him; and give him baths, and provide him joy and pleasure; then apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment draws toward the great nourishment, and frequently wash it with hot water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the member twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after recovery, and the broken bones are exposed, and the form of the member is ugly, all in vain does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the member entirely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; these works are blamed, and great evils come from them, even to death by accident; all in vain, if the swelling and torture are fresh, it is necessary to apply them with hot water, or cooked soothing herbs such as violet leaves, roots, and marjoram, and similar medicines; and make a soothing plaster well prepared, then take musk of violet leaves, and mix it with tallow or olive oil, and apply the plaster; or take fat figs, and grind them with coltsfoot powder, and similar medicines that reduce swelling suddenly.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodes are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it should be cut up to the bone using a sharp incisor gently; and apply careful study and diligence in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its proper place, for which it cannot move freely, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, it is fitting now to reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Since one delays, the shoulder swells, and by accident if one resets it with pins; because it is not fitting to move it while it is swollen: many times it brings on spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then leave him until the abscesses are pacified; then arise the limb in warm oil, and cure each part as it comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Often the jaws are dislocated sideways, and the dislocations on both sides occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their joints and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the ear, and prevent saliva from the mouth from being held, nor can they close their mouth, enveloping their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns to place through natural means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if the dislocation is complete and thorough, you must quickly reset it without delay; and in such a manner that the attendant holds the patient's head, and places a cloth or handkerchief in his mouth at the root of the jaw dislocation; and the other hand should be free to equalize; and instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And you place the joint evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to bring back, even if it is the two mandibles together, you should soak them in hot water and oil, gently resetting them; do not force the reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well, you should apply moistened lint wrapped in a paste made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft threads. Let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his head between two cushions so that it cannot move left or right, nor try to chew, but feed him soft food until the pain is gone, and secure the mandibles; and then let him eat whatever he wants lightly, without forcing his mouth open for eating and drinking, until the mandible is well secured and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to place within an hour and are not entirely returned to their sockets, then fevers and chronic stiffness arise, and by chance there may be intestinal rupture, and by chance there may be pure vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is fatal; many times those who suffer from it die within nine days.
de la forcelle	from the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate downward along the continuation of the bone and is dislocated only once at the fracture, and one can feel this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back and stretches out their arms; then press the bone firmly against your palm, and it will return; afterwards, apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it. The head near the wound cannot be dislocated; if only slightly, and if it is dislocated once, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus similarly, the shoulder heads are brought back when they are displaced from their socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way is that it dislocates at the part below the armpit; and the second is at the part of the pit; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates from below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it jumps quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps with force and returns with force.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men through percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated for this reason.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must test it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when moved downward to the shoulder blade, and you set apart the diseased shoulder from the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find in the head of the shoulder a depression, and beneath the shoulder blade at the tip of the shoulder head, as if it were a hole; and the diseased cannot bring its hand to its nose, nor move with any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when new, or if the child is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient upwards, then put their palms underneath the armpit, and lift the joint upwards to its place with force; and the ministers lift their hand, and extend it upwards, so as to put it there; thus it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said with hands after a day or two, it must be that the patient is bathed in warm water; and the minister applies it gently soothing, as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it. Then he should foin the patient's back, and put on underneath the armpit a piece of woolen cloth neither too soft nor too hard, then place the patient's foot on top of the cloth, and lift the shoulder blade properly, and draw the hand of the patient; and another minister hold the patient's head, so that it does not move down. That shoulder will return now, and if you wish to reset it in this manner: and it is that you have a person larger than the patient present; and stand facing the side, and place that shoulder underneath the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs by the arm; and another minister draw the hand of the patient downwards towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can carry something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the dislocation is also reset in another manner: and this is done by inserting a long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be set as flat as possible, neither too large nor too small; then it is placed under the patient, but he has a cloth over his chest, and the patient's arm is extended downward from the other side firmly. The joint will return to its place quickly. And if it does not want to return for all these things we have said, then do this treatment: take a poker two arms long and four inches wide, which has a head flat enough to fit perfectly under the armpit, according to this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind around the head of the wooden stake underneath, so that the stake does not bruise the patient, then place it under the armpit; and stretch out our arm above the long wooden stake, and bind the shoulder to the stake, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a ladder rung of a broad ladder, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from another part: the joint will now be restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is swollen, in whatever manner that may be, you must place under the armpit a pad of wool equal, then apply the poultice mixed with flour of mill, encens, and yolk of egg, over the entire shoulder and around it, then draw the bandage under the armpit properly, and turn it over the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, so that the limb becomes strengthened, because it will heal more quickly; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three puncture cauteries to it, as is described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it comes loose after 7 days, and the shoulder joint does not hold or cannot lift the arm above its head, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the dislocation would never have been placed in its proper position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is around the buttocks, and the nipples, or behind, is made by impulse and extension of hands; and it is treated wherever it occurs; and it is cured until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes cracks in the limb, and delays due to movement, the patient uses baths many times until those cracks heal and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not replied to, for one can see it clearly and feel it clearly; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick side with the healthy side, you must clearly see it.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And the joint is fixed, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it must be reset in the same way that abscesses come to head and heal, for if abscesses come to head and heal, it would be grievous to bring them back; and by chance they cannot be brought back completely, especially when it is at its root; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you extend its hand with both your hands; and its arms are stretched out, and its palms positioned according to the cut around, in front of, and behind, and place the joint at its proper location or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his face and presses with the root of the palm of the hand that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm and hold it by the root of the palm, so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm in all directions, then wrap it tightly with a long and wide cloth; and when you join the joint to the hand, apply an ointment with egg white to soften the joint, then form the joint properly until it returns; and when it is in its place, put on a dry plaster with beaten egg, and bind the arm at the neck of the patient, and let it be for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly set in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, renew the plaster and the bandage, and leave them so for some days, until it is firmly placed; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels grating after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is alleviated; or you may place on the joint a fat sheep tallow, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and apply hot water; when it sweats, thoroughly rub the joint, then reapply the tallow, and again apply hot water; do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, place on heated moist sheep's dung with butter, and apply it; it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand dislocates, and the return is light, more than other joints. Therefore, one must reset it quickly to its place as soon as it dislocates, whether the swelling has begun or an abscess has formed.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is as follows: you place the affected hand on a table, extend the fingers of the assistant's hand, and position your hand so that the palm faces the joint. Hold it until it returns to its place. Then, you must ensure that it is properly set; subsequently, place the back of the patient's hand on the table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, set the patient his back of his hand on the table, and the helper place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. If not, apply the plaster that soothes abscesses, and let him remain in such a state until it begins to heal.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint remains twisted; and this does not harm the patient as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve is cut or the artery; there is no other way but to use a fire cautery near the case, and by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then unbind it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is any stiffness, apply warm liquid grease and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	At times the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, at times on the back of the palm or the palm's center; then straighten the fingers, and keep the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to place. Then support the thumb of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed; and let it be 2 days, and then align it for that day; and nurse it without binding, as we have said, and unbind it daily, and make it move, and bind it again at night; and do this often until it is tight. If it is dislocated on the palm's center of the hand, do so as you did before until it heals. Do the same if it is dislocated in another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no certain treatment, for death often follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the vomiting comes without desire, neither can it be held back, and often they soften some limb, or both hips, or both arms. And often the shoulder blade changes in four parts; that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you rewarde if the gilbositez came from childhood: there is no cure nor healing for the totality.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say they are not always of great benefit. But I have abbreviated them according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes before the nipple, there is no health; and also that which comes straight to two sides, and one cannot cure it except that which comes directly to the back, as I say. And it is that the patient be stretched on one side in a level place, and have no bandage under him, so he does not swell; then stick two sticks into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpit of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two sticks; and let their palms be on the stick firmly until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three inches long, and wedge under the wall, and if the patient is on his side, put the head of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and place his feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do so at the wheel that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you insert two coals into the head of the patient's arm with one hand, and toward the feet with the other, placing one palm-width of long spice beneath each coal; in each coal, place a hole or let the wheel pass through, ensuring the coals are firmly embedded in the ground so they do not move; between each pair of coals, place a turning coal where the sinew turns, and use two small coals of one hand-width for turning the wheel; then tie the ligament that is among the joints to the wheel near the head, and the other ligament to the other wheel near the feet, with each minister turning their wheel as the ligament tightens, and the master keeping the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are equal, put a desiccative plaster with abundance of egg, and then the stoppers, and then the strip of three long fingers that purgues the leucosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and uses the patient for subtle recovery until he is healed; and if anything comes at the end of health, it must be administered softening and soothing medicines, with the strip that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of flax, and sometimes comes the appearance in the rear spine of the back, and one takes care that this is dislocation; and it is the bone that appears, for which one must not have presumption: by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come out of place only as dislocations; they are not dislocated in the same way as other joints. The joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: internally and externally, in front and behind; more internally it dislocates more, less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge that the hip is dislocated internally is as follows: when one aligns the injured leg with the healthy one, the injured knee appears longer and more open than the healthy one. The injured knee cannot bend at all; this is due to the head of the femur moving out of place, as it should be in a condition where there is swelling from an abscess.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens beforehand are that his leg is well positioned; nonetheless, he cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot do so and retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens after are that he cannot spread his knee or bend it, and this leg is more twisted compared to the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is at the site beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this semblance of dislocation is that you should reduce it if the dislocation is ancient and remains in its position. In such cases, there is no need for further treatment; and it is not fitting for it to have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must hasten to turn the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return to place and need no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or at the place where the limbs are tied above the knee; and another assistant extend his hand above in such a way that he places his hands under the armpits, then tighten with a rope around the thigh; and another holds the head of the limb; and stretch both up and down at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similitudes, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not so, it is necessary to treat its similitude. If the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, you must hold the patient on his healthy side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh, and above the angle, then position the ligature towards the angle and towards the armpit; then have another minister grasp the patient's arm, embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend it fully: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, it is necessary to tie the patient's two feet together with a strong ligature above both heels and knees, and let the injured leg be extended twice as much as the other; then hang it on the top of a pole, and let the arms dangle long. Then command the minister to grasp the top of the thigh, and have another minister hang along with the patient, who firmly grasps the thigh, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are out of place, the patients lie down, as we have said in that which concerns gilbositeit, and draw the thread above the leg of the sick properly, and also above the foot; then put two sticks, one at the head and the other at the foot, then insert the stick between the thighs of the sick in the form; and plant moist cloths around, so that it does not blister the sick, then stretch each minister towards him, and the irons place equally at his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	And if it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	And if not, put it on the table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, it must be quickly extend the affected leg as I have said; and place the palm of your hand on the crooked leg, then press with the other hand, and straighten downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is to the side, it must not be extended downwards or lifted from the ground, but should remain as if the hip were dislocated to the side, as we have said in our discussion of lying on two hips; and let it be supported by the thigh, with the ligament stretched as we have said before, and apply pressure at the joint with your hand. It will be proper when the patient extends his legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster and a bandage, so that the hips do not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then release it and put the plaster on again; and if you see that they are equal, apply the bandage as before, and leave it for three days; then release it, and allow the hip to heal well, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee can be dislocated in three ways: namely, within and without, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are as follows: you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the thigh. If it does not rest against the thigh, know that it is dislocated. The restoration of all this is done by seating the patient upright and extending their leg if possible. Place your back against their thigh and place their foot on yours. Then grasp the knee with your palms and draw it between your hands. Have others extend the foot until the knee returns to its place. The sign is that the leg rests lightly against the thigh. Apply a plaster, and heat the leg to the thigh, binding them tightly for three or four days. Then release the bindings. Do not allow the patient to move much while the limb is being strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is sometimes injured, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and protrudes before the part where it is dislocated: the reduction is slight, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only injured.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you must seat the patient upright, and hold the ministers firm by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot toward your right hand, and twice to the left, then extend it upward, and beautifully place the foot upward; do this twice, as we have said, by pulling and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, seat the patient on their back on the ground, and drive the stake firmly into the ground between their thighs, securing it with bandages tightly around, so as not to move the patient; then hold the ministers' thigh, and others extend the foot by their hands or by the ligature above the ankle; then extend each minister equally, and the stake should be fixed between the patient's thighs to keep them from moving when extending; then place the thumbs at the dislocation by the hand, and others hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at point, she puts the plaster and stops on it, and draws out the thorn, and binds the foot to the leg, and guards the nerves that are above the ankle behind, that the ligatures be not too tight; then lets it for two or three days, and if the ligatures soften, she loosens them; then unbinds at the third day or fourth, and keeps the patient from walking for four days; and if he goes before that termine, it is not safety that he does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses chase away, it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	Of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, they should be beautifully extended with effort, and this is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back or foot, you should seat the patient on a firm bench or on a table upright, and place his foot on what appears from these joints, then press strongly on his foot until it returns; and when it is equal, and there is nothing apparent, place under the sole of the foot a two-shouldered table, then hold firmly, and let him rest for three days, then release him; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	for wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and you see it healing, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not skilled in the art and have not long used it, and if you are not all wise and merciful and slow; but use at the beginning soothing things for the hot abscess, and leave the patient to God if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now reset the member to its place as the abscess cools down; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things for the cooling abscess, and cure the wound as it should be with drying ointments; and if there is a fracture with small broken bones, extract them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard against entering the way of fear according to what I have said, for this will avail you much according to your Creator, and for the wisdom that arms and protects you.
Amen	Amen
