O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine, together with its filling, and have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is firmly established in our region and has been thoroughly neglected, the science is lost and stripped away, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients of what the hands have performed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions were closed, and the science was distanced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revive it altogether the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come altogether the forms of the fire cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the measurement of the members, their forms and their connections and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and their movements and veins moving and at rest, and from where they arise.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, Hippocrates said that a needle with the flesh is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that whoever is not acquainted with the things previously said, must take care not to act in error and not to harm people; so that I have often wished more of those who undertake this science and rely on their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who incised an abscess of scrofula or throat in a woman, and incised the arteries of her neck; because of this so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another surgeon who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; so he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where the healer treated our land's duke who had a broken leg, and with the breaking instrument made a wound; and the healers, full of ignorance, set the break over the wound with strong ligature, and left no paste on the wound at all, and left it thus until the end; and commanded him not to loosen it; and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot rotted.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to loosen the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And let another poultice be applied to the abscess that will cause it to break open, and then inflame due to the malignancy of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure melancholic humor, it is not fitting to touch it with iron if it is not in a location where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, skilled surgeon, you are in need that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, works where there is danger in multiple positions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because you need to take care that the foolish ones do not speak ill of you. If you take your arms in consideration, and undertake your sick ones lightly and firmly, and use the best way so by the grace of God you come to salvation and be joyful; and leave the fearful illnesses without hope of health; and take away your arms from those who cause you doubt, and have faith in them that you may pass from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take into consideration a false illness, lest you be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have dealt with this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cautery and water medicine cautery, and the chapters are ordered from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools of cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things; and are ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, since we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid and of harm, are the longest speech and subtle science and secret answers; and of these many wise ones spoke, and agreed upon them; and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery aids universally in all temperaments where there is matter; there are two temperaments: namely, warm temperament due to matter, and dry temperament due to matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry temperament with matter, some debated and said that the fire cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not suitable for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so warm, and should not be applied to diseases caused by heat or dryness. Those who said the opposite stated that the fire cautery does great aid to hot and dry diseases that affect the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it so once through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And moreover, do not meddle with it except by those who have proven it, and who know through long use the chapter on cautery, the diversity of human temperaments, the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and duration of time; we have no fear from other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the parts assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that the fire cautery altogether with heat is part of wound care and has greater goodness than the cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and causes harm only to the part that is cauterized, and does not injure other parts much.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines cause harm to other parts by spreading, and bring diseases to the part that is ill; sometimes they even kill the patient. The fire, due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experience and by the length of service and study I have dedicated to the art, which is based on the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the length of the words. For it does not please me to take away from you the secret concerning fire and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher declares in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, boy, when the fire cauterizations should be done, and they chose the times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harms occurring are lessened by the aid of the cauterization; and especially if the cauterizations are for pains necessary and urgent that cannot wait for the time when greater illness may arise in the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think so, dear boy, as the foolish ones do; for the illness that is healed by cauterization does not return; and they say thus; but it is not as they think, because a cauterization is only medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that cause pain, and it is worth more than other medicines for the speed of its power and the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes once according to the patient's constitution and the location of the disease and its virtue; and in him are gathered the superfluities through the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauterizes applied at the location where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizes for teeth due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not come back at all; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And few people understand why cauterizes are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizes work after medicine, and their intentions are false, for when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we apply the cautere, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the latest in medicine, not according to the intent of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery made of gold instruments is better than iron, and they said this because of the quality of the gold and its high substance; but they also said that the blisters from the cautery do not cause putrefaction, which is not true, for I have proven it and found that it is so in some people; and gold cauteries are better than those made of iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you should not judge when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it should be cooled soon after; if it is heated too much, it must be put in water; and thus there are enough hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins should be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is for moisture and cold on the head, and in it there are two kinds that we make due to a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and for the multitude of dreams, toothache, and throat pain, especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine, altering the root for three or four days, according to what the virtue and the strength and the custom of the patient allows; and then renew the root of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place it crooked between your hands, and put his hands on the soles; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two means go, he will bleed from there. Then heat the cautery called "olivare," as its form is described here:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the mark signed with ink, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in turning; then withdraw your hand solely, and look if you see the bone a little; and if you do not see it, reheat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that, take a bit of salt, and put inside soft cotton, and put it on the mark, and let it be for three days; afterwards, put upon this wet cotton in butter; leave it there until the burning is gone; after that, cure the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacos" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound is left open longer, it expels more impurities; for this reason, they recommended leaving it uncovered.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said by some that the cautery should be applied so much that part of the bone is scorched, and then the burned part of the bone should be removed and cleaned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery should be applied so much above, and pressed down so forcefully that it displaces bone as wide as the hoop that women use in their fuseaux, for this causes the humors to be expelled outward; and one should leave the wound open for a long time. Afterward, one should clean and bind it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except perhaps in some cases where there is a fear of pain; and I think I should leave the less severe one. For the shoulders are weakened by continuous solutions from nature, as we witness in other limbs; and even when the patient's shoulder is weak from nature, and the first application of cautery seems more salutary to me, and from that I work accordingly for the most part.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes and lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," and of cleansing of the head and oils and poultices; and if they are given the fire cautery as we have previously said, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize over that spot a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing over each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, do the cautery on the side called "vasselz"; and the sides are where one places suction cups; and lighten your hand so that you do not go down to the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries for the horns should be finer than those used on the middle part of the head, and this is their form.
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When pain comes suddenly in a part of the head and extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicinal herbs, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases have been done, and all this does not help: then he should make cauteries according to two methods, that is, with medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries with medicine and water are as follows: you take a dolichos root, peel it, and cut a small piece for two heads, and then place the piece over the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can lay the dolichos root beneath the scalp; when it is placed there, apply it well and leave it on for twelve hours; then remove it and apply a piece of garlic, and let the wound remain uncovered for two or three days; afterward, place it under a poultice of butter.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until he is healed; and if you see, do those of some burning medicines that I have written or tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery iron which has the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the tip is made in the shape of a bell with only a little projection, and in the middle there is a small aperture; and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly move the iron lightly, until half the thickness of the flesh under the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery, which is above, does not burn, and let much blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton in the wound, and keep it on for three days; then put moistened woolen cloth on, and afterward treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and if you wish to cauterize this headache with a cautery called "cultellare", do it entirely at its tip, and beware of injuring the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of the headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery and iron from medicine do not suffice, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot; apply it thusly on the painful area drawing a line half an inch long, and withdraw your hand once, ensuring you do not injure the artery and do not come close to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard only to the motion and that spasm does not occur in the patient, and beware of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially for those who do not know it, and are not studied and inexperienced; leave the work unfinished; but I will tell you how one stops bleeding from the artery when it is cut, and I will show where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than that.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines solutives and other treatments that we have said in the division have been applied, and the pains do not change, then heat the cautery called "poins," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing entirely through the affected ear, or in both places where the pain is felt on both sides, and then move slightly upwards from the root of the ear since you have marked the spot; and make ten points in each ear; after which cure the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not of those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterization for similar conditions that come from drying and wasting of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this condition of torture that moves from phlegm in the glands, gargling, and purging, and if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient three times: one at the root of the ear, another slightly above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply the cautery over the top of the ear near a bit below the tip of the ear, and another on the temple as long as an inch; let the cautery remain in place until the halves of the heart are burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the cutaneous one that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it should be that the knives are a bit larger; after treatment of the head as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When the apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and the patient does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the head, and one on the area called "vassels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the opening of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient great and mending herbs for the brain; after reducing the swelling of the head, place a sinewrap plaster on the occiput; and this is the manner of the cautery: do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is cured thus, well and good; and if not, make three cauteries descending from the head down to the neck, with a large interval between each cautery. Cure it as for others, and if you see fit and the patient is suffering, make the cautery in the middle; and when necessary, two more above the two horns, and cure until it is healed; and let the cauteries be known as "olive," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of grease and as we have already mentioned; then touch the head of the patient, afterwards apply the fire cautery through the head and above each horn, both at the back and three at the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is in pain, and the disease is strong, apply four fire cauteries at the spine of the back; and let it be until the inner part is well burned, then withdraw your hand; afterwards treat until healed, and use the cautery called "olivare" as we have already mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of grease and other treatments as we have said in the section when the patients are great and suffer from cold medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate the pain, make a gargling and chewing with modified cerebrospinal fluid using good meats; afterward insert his head in a vessel in the middle, and make him the fire cautery as we have said before, on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make the cauterizations as I said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make him the subtle cauterization according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy, the superfluities or corrupted moisture are thick and gross, then make the cauterization with such cauterizes as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities decline to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then he should drink something by which his brains may be purified, according to what was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After heating the patient's head; after making the linen well, as a circle, so place it over the head; and let the patient sit crossed-legged, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and value much of butter of birch old; and the heated one with fire tempered, that the doth on which he is placed can bear it; after empty the circle from within over the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with another good government, until he be healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see cauterization being done by making pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain more; and then place soft cotton in butter and grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When fear comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and let the patient drink wholesome things for cleaning the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat or give him baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After this, instruct behind his head, and cauterize through the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of fear is in both eyes together, or in one if the descent is in one. And cover all the cauterization with all the veins and arteries beneath the heart, and let the cauterizations be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and during incisions how to handle it; and sometimes one makes a cautery or hot iron over the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the heart the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or in the arteries that appear at the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic excesses, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes: I cautere over the forehead, two cauteries over the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons over the two bones; and if there is more need, cauterize bloodily above the solar plexus with all the small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	with the body of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then let the patient drink three noxious herbs; after that, lance the head, and make a fire cautery or in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" above the two sores, a little below the hairline; and beware of the artery that you do not damage it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil becomes softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to make two cauteries on the two sinews as long as the sinew is; and leave the hand not aside until the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns white and pricks the eye, and in such cases cautery is applied according to two methods: namely with fire or with a burning medicament.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then place the patient in a healthy state; after that, draw a figure on paper of the eye that is as large as the leaves of the laurel, and let it be the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put moist cotton soaked in egg white and myrrh powder over the eye, then heat the cautery as I have described.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn a little and many times, until the corners are scorched in place; and the signs of health for the work are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the outline of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave thus for three days; afterwards put moist cotton in butter until the scalding is removed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when the hairs and papers become soft, then resume the cautery on that same part as you did first; and if the hairs are withered, cauterize until the papers return to their natural place and are even, and do not prick the eyes.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make a parchment in the shape of the bay leaf. Take frankincense and strong oil, one liang of each, and grind them together well; then apply it quickly so that it does not cool, spread it over the form as you made like the bay leaf, and place on the paper eyes. And if the disease is only in the eye, operate only in the I, and if in both equally; and put moist cotton beneath the eye in the yolk of an egg. And the patient's head be in your healthy hand, and place your finger showing over the medicine, pressing it slightly and the egg each time the patient feels the medicine biting, for he feels it as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, lift the head from below, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply the medicine again to the head or until the medicine has taken effect, ensuring that your actions are equal and your eyes fixed; then place a moist cotton with butter on it until the sore heals, after which cure the head of the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take great care in your work that the medicine does not stick to your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, resume the treatment on that side which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the wound heals; and this is the form of the leaf of the juniper.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and let not the right way be replied to him who is the student of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your well; have the minister place his head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or change position; after that, put moistened cotton in oil of egg or juice of myrrh over the eye; then heat the cautery which is divided: and place it on the head as if forming with a vulture's feather, joining all so that the cautery forms; if you see, let it be pointed from one head to another, and if you see, let it also be like a tent; but in any case, what is placed there should move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After this, if the fistula is open, draw out the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, operate on it, and extract from within; after that, place the hot cautery in a feather-like form, and keep your hand at the part above the eye for the cautery to prevent your hand from doing mischief; and put the cautery in the oil's fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, continue the cautery once more, and another if you need to, and let it be for three days; after that, place a moistened cotton cloth with butter on it, and the treatment of the ointment until he is healed. And if forty days pass and he is not healed, apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed; and treat according to what his chapter dictates.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Hear about the fistula, and set it right; after that, place one thin camel's hair in the opening.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the quantity of one pennyworth of pitch; and hold your hand or sponge firmly, and let not the patient move at all that the melted pitch does not run into his eye; and it is fitting to place on the eye of the patient wet woolen cloth or wadding: the pitch so cures the fistula and the healthy part through marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, it is fitting to administer pertusin to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in itself.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When the cure for these cracks, as we have said in divisions, does not benefit, then heat the small fire cautery scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place it in the cracks until it cools; afterwards, apply a plaster until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the eye socket, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and is matured and becomes a fistula; and you have cured it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then you must have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards, open or puncture the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cools at the bottom of it, and behind it; and do so once or twice, after the cure as we have said in treatments, until it heals; and if it is cured thus, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and medical treatments do not help, then place the patient's head on a healthy one; afterwards, heat the cautery as described below in such a manner that you place a wick on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, let it sit for an hour, and then spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is set, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and the treatments with medicines are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and heat the end of it in a iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it at the point of a tent, and let the butter melt, and place it quickly on the aching tooth; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see soft wool and cotton that have cooled down, and put them on the aching tooth, and place hot iron above it until the fire reaches the pulp of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery made of fire is such that you take a cane of iron or coal, and let it be large so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, as will be formed below, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed on that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then quickly apply it; this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whichever tooth you want, and according to what you have power to do; this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is from phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery coals as described below to produce the flame, with two openings for smoke to exit from the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice where it needs to be until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days; then cover with a moist cloth wrapped in butter until the burning is removed; after that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cauterization:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is fitting that the patient be evacuated first by solvent medicines; after that, apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply the other cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cauteries which are called "clavile" be as we have shown the form before; and cure the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the burn
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the body are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor drying, and the illness is old, then apply two cauteries on the side of the ribs; and the other cautery between the breasts; and let the cauteries which are called "clavile" be as we have said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a fire cautery at the point where the cautery is called "poins," of which the form was given earlier in the illness of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or slightly fewer.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment of the head as previously described, let the cauteries be three rings according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, since you make three of them in one place.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After treat the patient on his back and side; afterwards, gently touch the heart inside with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two nooses of the form given here.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it perceives pain up to the side, and bring together the figure of the cautery as four cauteries; and for this, a cautery with three nooses is made, because the figure of cauterization consists of four cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nooses.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes adjust it on this first nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing on the cautery burned powders with salt; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, little happens, then apply a cautery over the thick part of the cautery clave, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patients are healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach to such an extent as it is contrary to its nature, and there are many catharrs in him, and by the usual methods of treatment they do not profit him, then it must be that the patient is treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I make three cauteries on the sole of the foot equal to the size of a pea, for each cautery claw-like, and two above the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is in three angles, and have space between them so that they do not stick together when putrefaction occurs; and let the cauteries be perfect so that they affect both sides of the heel, and the figure of the cauteries according to this form without alteration:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cautery with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, cautery by pricking and bleeding over the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see of ink; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, while it is forced out of its natural temperament by excess; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then the patient must be treated on his back; and make three cautery marks according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the costal regions of the man are located; and let there be the size of a thumb between each cautery; and may the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand much over the entire cautery; and let it be burned only to the midpoint of the heart, and let the patient lie on his back; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is so, cautery these cuticular cauteries, if you are skilled and dexterous in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up all the body; and let it not come to boil, for the heart is very delicate there, and the wise ones must see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the薄膜: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe; and if it is in the薄膜, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure draws out the venom, it is necessary that the patient be treated above its head; then measure the length or width of the wound or abscess, and then heat the cautery to resemble the size of the sun, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the cautery until the cores are burned through to syphac, until the pustules are entirely removed; after the treatment, as in the treatment of blisters, until it is healed; and it should not be used any more than by those who have long studied the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured at least once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly operate, and always it seems to me that it is better to leave them alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleursin.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries of roots of aristologe for pleursin, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the longest you can find, and dry it, and let it be as large and as long as your thumb; fill it with oil, and hold it to the fire, and apply the cautery between the forcele and the neck, two small cauteries a little downward in the part beneath the chin; two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declinating a little backward; one cautery under the foot, one above the stomach, one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the shoulders; do not press your hand, but apply it openly as if smelling it.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it is said by any ancient that no man uses the fire cautery pretending to be razors, and they heat it and put it between the ribs until it comes to this abscess; and then the pain went away, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one method is that you make three cauteries or four, aligning according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the cautery of the liver as we have said before; and do not press your hand against all of the cautery, and let the patient often lie on his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the keur which is at the location of the mouse, or where the wounds of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations lift the keur according to the keur, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After letting the two inflamed nostrils burn until the cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will have four. If you see, then cauterize all the cautery at three times.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten putrefaction over a long time, and this is worth using instead of the other treatments mentioned.
de ydropisie	for edema
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not suitable for edema, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help much, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the penis; and let the cauteries be close to the side of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After let the cautery open to drain pus long enough, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and the healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be claw-like as shown in front; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is mentioned above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in a person who is dropsical and are full of yellow bile, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the ring finger; and remove your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would be out of the yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the cuticular; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, between the legs; and leave the cauteries long without curing, until the bile comes out; after that cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the dislocation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, since the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, they cannot be cured by means of curing; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong virtue, then make the great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about before regarding the stomach cautery, at the circular cautery. And four cauteries between the subtiles lips for every subtle cautery circle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moles abundant and the patient suffering, make him undergo the fire cautery on the blade, and one cautery on each heel, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are open or formed, whether one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, if it does not benefit, make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is just above the iliac crest little by little in a triangular manner, and one cautery below the navel two digits; and if you think his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and swelling is seen in the flanks, then make the large cautery on the stomach as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire cauterization claw-like; and leave the cautery open long enough.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carbuncle which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the carbuncle, heat the cautery to resemble a razor, and then place it fully ablaze over the carbuncle being treated; and let your hand remain there until the vein begins to sprout, which is when you stop; do this once or twice, and if there is much carbuncle, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, apply beneficial ointments until it heals; and if you cauterize with a large cautery over the scrotum, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a cut or opening, which we will describe in its place, comes such a sickness that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is an abscess and is filled with decayed pus and corrupted moisture, you must probe it thoroughly with a sharp probe, and ensure that you know the full extent of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to a glowing red, insert it into the abscess according to how far the probe entered, and repeat the application of the cautery several times—once, or twice, or three times, depending on what is needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves nearby and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these symptoms, and do not make them external except in living flesh, and think that it is not clean; after treating the flesh until it is healed, and if the flesh is healed for a long time, then know that the flesh is entirely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the flesh is torn, and the bones are corrupted at the root; and in this way as one we will speak of in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys and with much wind, and does not take hold of a woman, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other using the clavile cautery that we have already mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will do greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing patients to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs begin at the base of the penis, on both sides, and let each cautery be as long as one inch; and make a cautery along the back, or there if you need to; and let the cauteries be sharp according to the form previously described.
de la marris	of the gallbladder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the gallbladder is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed; and when they come, great pain is felt: then it must be that three cauteries are made between the buttocks, as we have said for the bladder, and two cauteries along the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the thick moistures descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it dislocates from its place. The signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and one finds the root of the dislocation in the region of the socket. Then you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the joint around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and let the cautery be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have this cautery at hand, make three large olive oil cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the joints. Cure until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the socket of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we said in the division and the treatment is ineffective, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the large foul humors using bad pills or other good pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards, you apply a fire cautery; and the method of the fire cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with burning medications together, and a fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	The fire cautery is of many kinds. One method is as follows: you cauterize the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form, and ensure they are deep and large, with an interval between each cautery the width of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive oil; another time, you make one cautery in the middle at the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the parts of the thigh be seared.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then apply two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and above the ankle four dois, on the left side a little. And let these cauteries be both incised and seared, through the thickness of the thigh. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the dois of the foot or near it, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four points with the cautery called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the business is greater, and he knows that the pain be below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery with the blade cautery or circular one, and take good care in all thy cauteries that thou leave not so long the cautery that thou burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that thou do not make to the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purgative from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said about the fire cautery for the hip, of which here is the manner: make such a iron and let it be at the head as thick as one nail's width of a finger, or a little less, and let it be interwoven and let it be between the interweaves from one side to the other distance of an inch; and let the interweaves above two parts, and let them be like peas, and may have the handle of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red and smells hot, and then place it on the socket of the diseased hip, and turn it over to the healthy side; and apply the cautery once with the cautery reheat and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster with butter, and keep the wound open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery little because of the fear of its gaze, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, he is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and should be placed where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cauteries in medicine are such that you make the instrument of iron or copper into which the margin of the mouth is inserted, and it should be either a plate long on one side, and at its height be two palms, and each have the size of a thumb; and they should be open front and top, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hip box on the patient lying on a healthy side, press your hand tightly over the hip box; then pour in between the two circles of hot coals that have been heated by fire for just a little while, and let it remain one to two hours, allowing the patient to endure the heat and the burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found both by bite and by fire; and when the bite has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter until the blackness of the scalding is removed; and let him lie three days until corruption is treated; and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, do the same with the instrument as you did for the hip, increasing it according to what you have done for the hip; and this is the way of hot application, and I have written about it in treating the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	or there be a small hole defaced so that the point of a razor might enter; and set over this one another pot well leaded, and put on alkali and chalk and sweet awn on top, until there be two thereof above the powders as you have well ground by hand; and let it thus be until it descends awe and chiece or well leaded, then take all that awe, and throw it over the alkali and the chalk as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very watery and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauteries of other limbs. For it does the work of fire, and to other medicines from which one cauterizes well the hip as with an acanthus leaf and honey and chalk with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where a noble was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and he greatly praises it, saying that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured after only one time when this treatment was performed, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in such a manner that you take fresh and dry verdigris, grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and leave it on; and when the patient no longer feels the heat, remove it after three hours.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath while his body is slightly warmed, and have him go to bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cautery with such medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheep's dung, it helps much; and the cautery should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the depression between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards, take dry sheep's dung, and burn it until it becomes coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is cooled; and repeat this process again, and do not cease doing so until you think by sense that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased. This method of cautery is called "sheep's dung cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these circumstances warrants cautery, though it may be useful for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It must be that the patient is devoid of fetid pills or other similar matters. Then, upon the back where the pain resides, make three lines signed with enche, and in each line use five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can tolerate; and the cauteries should be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium claw cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes upon small children, and the signs of its beginning are that their grip is tight when they rise, and fear. And you find in the last spine along the back and near the others an appearance that comes upon them.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and find it cured, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	That the cauterization properly inflame each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see this, cauterize between the spines with a sharp fire cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, ensure that you do not apply cauterization in gangrene where there is a defect of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain from the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain from joints arises due to moisture spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes from the feet, which doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold with medicines not being able to cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such a manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick at the sole of the foot, and let the cautery be as wide as we claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, let you make cauteries on each knee three or four from each part, with the entire cautery being olive oil; and if you have need of more, then make more, but do not keep your hand away until the coals of the fire are extinguished.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, the fire cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter shall be applied.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks along the flexor II lines; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make pricks on each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbow or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and soothing medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good governance and purge the humor, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syface
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture comes in intestines, and the bowels descend to the hips and it is new, then you must, when you see it cured, that he not eat at all that day; and let him use things that empty his stomach, so that the fæces descend from his stomach; after which make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his belly until the bowels are repaired, and remold them with your fingers, and sign under the rupture over the bone of the thigh, and with all a sign that be similar to half of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and gives off smoke.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remold the bowels in their place; and the ministers hold his hand above so they do not return. Work well on the thighs of the patient, and put the cook and the squire on the thighs, and the other one on the foot that holds his hands; then place the cautery under the sign with all your hand, and keep it straight until you touch the bone. If you do not reach the bone at first, repeat again another time until you come just to the bone. Be carefully subtle so the bowels do not protrude when you apply the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that thereby the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the fire cautery, your work amounts to nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the cautery for children is subtle according to the size of their body, and for adults as large according to their measure; after three days, cure the area of the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards, apply other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well stitched; and it must be that their nourishment is allowed to last long enough so that boils do not emerge when they are taken to rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be given a well-made bandage, and keep him in bed for another forty days; let him have good rest, working little and guarding against too great a fullness from drinking and eating, and from raising his voice too high; and when he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment to file in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing further, then make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned for one-third of the cord; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with a three-angled cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the place of insertion with a line and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand through all the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its size and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is effective, that is well; but if not, you must repeat the other cauterization above it, because such is the custom that it must change to the part nearest to it, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	of the art
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The illnesses are often cured by the fire cautery with great help, and especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cauterization, take care that the disease is in the beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will infect the entire illness, then make V cauteries on the head: I place one at the nape and another toward the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on the two horns, and I behind on the occipital ridge; and I leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and until the bark is removed such that the vapors from the gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the mice according to what is said before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the measles are scattered everywhere; and they clearly indicate it, then you should cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery on the nose, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and another laterally, and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the palm fossae; and take care not to burn the nerves that are behind the heel, and cauterize once on the bone of the hand, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more aid you provide, and it benefits the patient; and know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to those you will find in manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, apply the cloth of flour of wheat with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured with medicines and oils and plasters, but it is not yet healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a little within the thickness of the skin; then cure it with applications until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes the cautery is made by hand and with a needle and on the back, at the end of the nerve that makes the limb moveless, and thus the swelling is removed; and in any case, no one should do it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of calluses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is ripe, and medicine's means are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery somewhat strong, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white is gone and its color changes; then cure with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and gall fluid and almond fluid, each in part; mix all together, and bind with a cloth, and apply to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of a chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre begins to appear, and you see it stop, cauterize with a round cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise men said that one should make a fire cautery also in the middle of the sore; and all the same, this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen such happen once; and it is more proper that it be cauterized between, at the cautery called "circule," as we said in much about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes a long time to die or due to the excess it causes or the age of the patient (that is, too old), and he has little blood, or from its tension; and you see that it should hasten to death: then cauterize around much with small cauteries pricking; after, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	She will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it from above in such a manner that the course of the putrefaction be alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a corrosion of the member, for it eats away the members as fire does to dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can bear the cautery of fire altogether, then heat the clavile cauteries very little and much, according to what is fitting for the place or where the disease is; after cauterizing from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and let nothing remain of it, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and place over the cauterized places a sufferable cloth with oil until the scalds from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the application of ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, that is good; and if it does not, then reapply the cauterization to what remains from the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture has sometimes been cured with aqueous medicine instead of the fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for the aqueous medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of corns that come from the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from the feet, due to sores, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large ulcer that eats into the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, the fire cauterization, and the hot aqueous cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery tip as hot as a vault pen, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can hold a nail in all parts, and that it have thin margins; after, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail; and leave it thus three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the ointment on overnight, and the nails will fall out and be uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire on the body, and often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to it; and it is done in this manner: take a stake of coal or iron, or a vault pen, and place it on the nail and the althel (for warts); and put the stake on so that it burns all around, then put some hot awn on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand by turning it such that the margin of the stake comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water deep way up to the root; and let the patient suffer a bit from the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Afterwards do this one after another, until you dry all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	treat the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or after a severe illness or another ailment, it is necessary that you make four or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one at the head, and one on the stomach with the olive cautery; if this stops the trembling, and hastens the recovery of the health of the cold illness.
des pustules puans	pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes apparent by outward signs of the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from corrupted masses.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary at the first sign that a cautery be made on each head of the pustule: a fine wood cautery from juniper, with its points heated by fire, or from the root of long aster, or with the lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cautery is made at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and it does not allow the tumors to grow further, but the superfluous parts that arise are broken, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut during the wound, or incision of the abscess, or the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a most grievous thing to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very much until the pain is soothed beneath your finger, and no taste comes out; then heat several small and large olive cauteries until they are all red; then take one, whether large or small according to the wound and the limb where the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the flesh is charred.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are still hot, take another cautery quickly from those at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until the flesh is well charred; and watch that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; know that when flesh runs from an artery, it cannot be well cauterized by itself when the artery is large, unless it is done in one of the four ways we have said: by cautery, or extraction if it is not already treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines placed there that have power to char blood; and let it be tied and held firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat a stench from lime closely with cloths or put burning things there, or similar things, if it does not help much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and he has neither cloth nor medicine present, he must place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and spread it well so that it is stenchy above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the hand, but rub the inner part with cold water frequently until the flesh is very cold, making it freeze and swell and stenchy; and then proceed with the cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or burning medicine, and we discussed the operations, causes, instruments, and forms of the cautery; and I placed that chapter from the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same path so that one finds it more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And since I begin this, it is fitting, sir surgeon, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first fire cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to have greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come in for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such that contracted so severely with their illness that they died lightly through the frenzy he found of his illness and the greatness of his wickedness; and one must have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these I give their meaning, and say: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more careful consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not yield rashly but wisely of what you are certain, and from which you can take and leave; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick to whom health may be brought; and this will help you achieve good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear dear son, May our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by discussing it section by section, as I did in the chapter on fire cautery, where I spoke of the head down to the feet, because you will find it easier to understand what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often affects infants during birth, and when the baille (a tool used in assisting delivery) presses too forcefully on the head of the infant. And sometimes it occurs due to a reason not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur except in children, and among those whom I have seen it, death hastened; for which reason it seems to me best to abandon the work in partial treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen the child whose shoulders were full of fluid, and the head was swelling each day so much that it could not bear it; and the moisture was so gathered beneath the bone at the site of the syphac, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, as far as the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the mouth open on each side, and the pus jumps when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond: then you must make three cuts in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After closing the cuts with bandages and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days; then untie it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and allow the head to heal evenly. Then give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look for the apex of the abscess and the collection of pus; for it is sometimes in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the skin where the apex of the abscess is, and the collection of pus, making a cut according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a person has a disease called "catarre" in the eye or the pus, and the disease is ancient, and the cure from medicine does not help much, then the last cure is to use the cautery by which we will cauterize the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the eyes blacken, the patient should turn their head; afterwards, rub the eye with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then squeeze the patient's neck completely with the cloth; then observe where the vein lies, and the eyelids are on either side of the ears, and little are covered; then mark the eyelids with ink, then cut both with a sharp spatula from two sides, so that the cut extends to the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, place the spatula under the artery and cut above, cutting as twice the width traversely.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow upwards continuously out.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, you must measure the length of the space of three douzains; then cut and make until reaching the bone; what blood it is necessary to put out is six deniers' worth, and by chance a bit more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains over the bone point of syphilis, let the gauze that we apply not get wet, then hold the wound open and bind it, and the ointment cure until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emigraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old emigraine comes, and acute cataract, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and ancient sore eye and similar things, and these are treated with methods of medical treatments and all of this does not profit them, then we must extract the arteries in the temples and use cauteries, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes the hair behind his temples grow long, and hears the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is little responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, the patient holds his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and wipes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatule of this which has the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then cauterize the skin lightly until you see the artery, then draw it up with forceps and cut it well from the threads beneath each part; and if the artery is fine, turn it with the point of the needle and cut out a piece of that part according to the size of two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, neither does the abscess burst completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw off the blood from six veins, just to three; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two loops with a double strong silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the suddenness of the wound, and causes no further bleeding; then cut the superfluous part between the two ties at that same hour, and thereafter, if you see fit, cauterize the cutellaire cautery down to the bone until the shoulder is cauterized; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizations are help in finally drying out the moisture: for they are of greater aid to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the vein with old cotton and place something well-made over it; when you release them, they should be treated with dry medicines that produce flesh and bandages until they are healed; and if there is no skin from the artery as much as you operate, then hasten by cauterization or use the cotton of vitriol and squeeze it with your hand so that the skin is coagulated; and if you do not have this present, place something over the vein enough so that the skin freezes, and wet the cotton with cold water until the skin stops; and it should be held as needed; what is dried and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein from this cutting cautery divided into two parts, but the cuttings should be well thick to prevent more prolonged heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too cold, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a large piece of ginger, and then when you have signed on to the two loins, and you apply a hot iron until it comes just to the bone, and incise the vein in two loins; and let them be spaced apart between the two heads because they are not entirely cauterized with this cautery from start to finish; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the root of the eye socket, and medicine applied to these veins does not help, you see the patient's forehead turn red, and feel or observe jerking movements as if from tremors; and you find the eyes cold and moist such that the hair on paper falls out, and the paper is heated and scorched by the warmth of the tears, so it needs this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in the old days "bruise cure", and you must do this behind the patient who has this illness; let him have or let his hair grow on his forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and one of these incisions as deep as two douzains going down until the skin, and the other two at the sides over the sinews, and beware not to cut the arteries that are at the sides over the sinews; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jaws, and let each wound be the size of three douzains through and through; have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth for wiping the blood, then apply the sharp side of the spatillum from which this is made.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is from the temple to the second incision; and cauterize all the flesh which is over the bone between the two incisions, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove the spatillum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert into the first wound the instrument called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is rough, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the buttock side of the wound, and the rough edge towards the bone, and keep it in place until it reaches the middle of the wound.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels descending to the eyes until the incision is continuous until it reaches the part that opens at the side of the wound, and then continue in the middle of the wound until the other edge; and then extract the blood evenly, and squeeze out the cloth for the blood taken; then place a tent of old cotton in each wound, and put moist cloths in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep abscesses from forming; on the third day remove the bandage, and apply a large dressing with hot water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other dressings used for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of eye pain
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	when someone comes with a severe cataract accustomedly, and you see the eyes turned inward and small, and weakening of vision, and burning papers; and the hair falls out, and when they touch it causes an aqueous pain, and the sick sneeze; then know by these accidents that those materials and this cataract come from many veins, and the blood that is, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you instruct the patient to look at his own forehead, then make a great incision between the eyes, and another slightly wider.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton, and linen; then cover above with moistened cloth in wine and oil, and be careful to avoid a hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a manner thus: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of calamine, and make a plaster from them; and administer it in these wounds to bring flesh forth through all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mineral stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as wheat, beans, peas; or effluents such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear and does not adhere to the ear or grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then proceed with its extraction; and cause the patient to vomit by means of condisi, and plug his nostrils when vomiting occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes up during this treatment; and if it does not come up, proceed with the extraction using fine forceps, of which the form is described here.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes up with the forceps, that is good; if not, proceed with extraction using a fine needle of small gauge; and if it does not come up with that, make an ear pick from silk thread and insert the end of the thread or a hole in the ear firmly, and plug what is around the thread with soft wax so that the liquid cannot enter through the thread; then draw it out thoroughly, for many times it comes up as we have said; and if it does not come up in such a manner, take glue and put in paper clips or any tool that is sharp for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue against the stone or whatever it is, and draw it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not burst from all these things we have said, hasten to cut the ear as with an abscessed and swollen one, and spasm; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient senseless by the cephalique, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient in your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where the fat or bone hangs; and let the cut be as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is encased and inflamed, administer the extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the spatumile tenue subtile according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine tongs and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear when water falls into it, the patient should use sneezing to expel the water, and dry the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it drains forcefully through that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If this is not the case, take as many stones according to the length of your strong hand, and heat them slightly on fire; then put one of these stones in the patient's ear, and hit it from another part with a stone. Strike the stone in the ear with another stone until the pus runs out completely, and thus it will run out completely; and if you see, take reed, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head next to fire until the softer reed is burned; then do this with other reeds until the pus runs out completely, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the arrow, if it is of small size, like a flea and similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel it, administer the extraction with forceps; and this is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of vermin from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure is not effective, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight: if there are no apparent vermin, you should remove them with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, you take the cane of which this is made.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the most fine probe into the ear according to the quantity of the pain the patient feels, then gradually fill the entire canal; do this often until all the vermin emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, stuff the canal with cotton as I have said in dealing with stones; and if they do not protrude forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in extracting vermin, and you will find them in treating distillations; and you should instill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, of which this is the form as you can see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be it of silver or tin thin from the bottom through the small holes, and above for dripping; and to press within the distillation use a well-made tool of tin for this purpose, and if you wish take the razor and wrap around the tip suitable cotton; then throw your eye or your juice, and what you wish from your medicines in the wick, and the wick be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is dripped or movement of the ear; and let the patient smell the medicines inside, and that the distillations be slightly heated on fire as one distills in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppers of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men due to a wound obstruction or flesh grown within the ear, and these obstructions sometimes fully heal in the ear, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only partial healing of the perforation, and the hole is well seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which fully heals so that one cannot see it is of great healing in many ways, and in such cases, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look within: if you see the excrescence apparent, then the work has all this spatumile of which this is formed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, so that it does not blister the ear; if the excrescence is of flesh grown or a tumor of the ear, then use fine forceps, and gently remove it until all the flesh is entirely extracted.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is completed in the ear, take a sharp and light razor and heat it slightly with fire, then place it on the part of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the operation where the patient feels cracked in the ear, pierce lightly, and be sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and add marrow in the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this until the wound is healed, or take a tent and marrow in rose water, and powder on broken vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, it must be that you remove the tent and apply another wettent of marrow in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the bleeding continues, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the hemorrhage which are or will be treated for distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the charcoal of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This herbal leaf that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and are dried, you must spread them with tongs and forceps, and the juice of a spathillum from its roots; then apply it to the eye in a bottle of vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not decorticated, cauterize them with the thin lens cautery, and after incision, move them; many times they recover, since no part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	many times in papers come eyes that seem gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this the illness is called "hail," and it is a gathering of moisture large on the paper above and below; the operations are such: see if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; then make a cut wide, then burn each part lightly, then take with tongs and scrape.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot scrape it without piercing a little the paper, then do not hurt the patient; and if the cut is large, it has a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply much force, for ointments will restore it quickly and induce flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the gravel descends into the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and place the gravel with tongs, pressing it from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it matters not; and when the gravel is cut, wash out the eye with salty water, and cure the head of that which brings corruption until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a corruption that is found in the membranes above the papers, and this happens more to children than to any other people, and greatly harms their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hurry to their eyes; and for this reason, they lie on their faces, and sleep there, and have their papers beneath them soaked with moisture that swells and obscures the appearance covered by exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the joint with your fingers and feel the dislocation within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient places his head on your side; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity contained by the dislocation of each part, then put it over him; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the dislocations be gathered within the circle; then cut through the moisture at the midpoint making a slit wide enough, and not more than the wound made in the healthy vein; and cut the skin thoroughly until you see the dislocation; and by many preparations comes dislocation from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the piece of cloth charred between your two fingers and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is scattered; and guard that you do not press in the incision, so that you do not come all the way to the spinal cord up to the eye, that you do not damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extraction does not open at the beginning of the incision, enlarge the incision slightly gently until it opens; then extract as we have said, then fill with soft cloth and water, and place on the wound, and extract with lint.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such people who grind grain and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is an hot abscess at the site, apply soothing plasters until he is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers' hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs other than what is natural, and these hairs mature, they are harmful to the eyes, and cause conditions similar to habitual tearing and softening of the papers and opacity, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by a fire cautery with all kinds of heat, or by a water medicine as described in the previous chapter on cauteries, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by applying ointments, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the head of the patient in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is turned inward, that is good; if not, insert a needle along the whole length of the thread above; and let this be behind the margin of the paper or where the hair grows among these hairs, and draw the thread upward on the whole paper, and trim it with scissors; then cut in the part below the paper, below the added hair, to all the spatumile copant, from the large tearer to the small one; then pull out the thread, and place under the paper a little tent of cotton and silk, then sign on the paper a figure of an enche, as the leaf of mirte, and always it must be that the figure is according to the quantity you see lift the paper which is divided for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs much of the paper according to how it becomes softened; then make at all the spatumile above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the large tearer until small; and let it be one of the cracks near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the ounce into one of the two angles of the heel, then scorch all; then join the two lips with a stitch of an awl along all the fine thread of wool, and wipe away the blood, and make dry the superfluous threads above the two sorcil to any gluey things, if you wish to do this; and if not, you may have no care for it, then leave the stitch and the thread until three or four days; then cure the wound without a stitch with drying and constraining things, because the paper will revive suddenly from the wound and their joining, but the stitch is worn (as the ancients say), and this is works without fear; and another manner is that you sign the paper in a figure which is as like the leaf of laurel as we have recounted, three inches divided according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply those which surmount the small forces evenly according to the form which is given here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the things are not equal,
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper and cut inside as I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two thin liens as long as the paper and as wide as the space between the fingers; and tie at both heads where you hold the threads; then join one to the other closely above what rises from the paper of the eye, and withdraw the two canes from the parts formed; and leave thus for some days, and the skin which was constricted will die and necrose and fall off, so that it shall fall by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, and you must bind with force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is lifted, and no more hair will grow; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a fine needle, and insert the thread of silk slender; then join the heads and tie both subtly, and let the lengths of the threads one palm in length; then place another subtle thread of silk briefly, and tie its head to the thread; then put the patient's head on your healthy side; and keep away from the sun so that the operations are clear, for this is a subtle and minute operation, then insert the needle throughout the chase at the root of the added hair, and make it pierce in the parchment hastily as long as you pull over the natural hair; then extract the hair until above the chase, and put into the chase that hair if there be one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out with the natural hair throughout the chase in the parchment.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, you shall pull the chase out through all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes forth from the pertus above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then you shall pull the chase and the thread, and close the wound for two or three days, until the hairs grow in their place and flesh comes up; and if the hairs are small, you shall accompany one long hair of natural hair, and let it be removed with that or leave it, until it is lengthened and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "alecrati" or corruption, comes to the oil, it occurs in two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or an incision, or a fire cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut the sutures, and separate the edges, and put inside linen tents, and tie until it is healed; and it is not fitting that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first; but the work of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rinse with water or urine and linseed cooked, and ointments melted in any of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not heal completely according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are only directions for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the matter that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and fire cautery and similar things; and the method of the work in this is that you take a needle, with which there is double thread, and pierce the flesh, making the thread come out at the left eye socket to the right, so that the threads emerge at two heads of the flesh; then place the flesh above on all the needle, and the clamp on the wide spatumile.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it should, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the裂隙中，然后扭转纸张，并在纸张内部形成II个裂隙；让这两个裂隙的角度与你已经切割的切口的两个角度相匹配，并且使它们形成的角如同一个没有“i”钩的字母所呈现的样子；然后去除那层肉，根据你的布条覆盖的地方的数量来确定去除多少，之后重新连接断裂的部分并用羊毛线缝合；最后按照我们之前所说使用软化药物和绷带直到痊愈。
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the malady comes from a cut or suture or cautery, it is fitting that you make a full裂隙从纸张的毛发之间，按照前面所述；然后在帐篷两片布料之间分开，如我所说；并且应根据疾病的形状进行手术，因为它的形状差异很大，大师们会尽力发明各种器械使疾病恢复其自然形态；病人本身也应根据需要进行多种准备和处理。
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture occurs in the hand in such a manner that the paper above is hardened with the white of an egg, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then you must therefore put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it up; and hold it with forceps until you copes what is aerated at the subtle spatumile, which should not be too harsh or too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatumile being too harsh and bleaching the eye; and let your incision, of which you burn together, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all this is healed, and no pus is formed in the salty, watery, or irritable eye; then place a linen tent between the paper and the eye, and put on the eye a moistened wool cloth soaked in abundant egg; and after three days use bandages and other binding things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nail of the eye is according to two manners: it is nervous and seems like a hard cornea, and another which is not nervous but seems like white moist ice, that when touched with iron and carefully treated with forceps, one cannot see; and both seem to begin near the large lacrimal gland, and grow little by little until they cover all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is as follows: the patient places their head on your lap, then opens their eye; you lift the paper with your hand, then cut the nail with small forceps, and stretch it above. Then take a needle, and insert the hair of horse, or deer, or ox, and strong thread into it. Double the point of the needle slightly and push it through the nail, piercing it completely with the entire needle. Stretch the nail with the thread and keep it above, then scrape along the side of the nail which is next to the pulp and silk until you reach the head of the hair up to the lacrimal gland. Cut off the remainder at the root of the lacrimal gland with fine particles and small forces, leaving the natural flesh or lacrimal gland so that the body does not react to the incision by producing tears habitually; sometimes only the nail and thread are stretched, as we have said; then scrape along the entire pulp surface, which is how it forms.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care that the spatule does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced; after incision, sprinkle a little powdered salt into the eye, and from collyrium made of litharge, and leave it until another day; then cure with that which is appropriate until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the awl cannot enter, often this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it cover, work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatule slightly sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And reduce the nail gently, and if you see that it thins and the reasoning presses in, distil from your mouth into the eye collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and salt powdered, and plug the eye until another day; then resume the other work according to this same procedure until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the eye, as with a hot abscess, then lance it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the eye by great harm, suspend it with a needle, and cut off one part but not all, so that tears do not come; then distill in the eye red wine made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that grows around the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people's eyes grow red flesh once, covering the pupil and being held on papers and turned upside down, seeming like a water lily. The work is such that the patient puts their head to your healthy side, then closes their eyes, and all that red flesh is removed with suitable needles and force; then suspend it by force. Cut off the first layer of flesh, continuing to cut until you reach the edge, and be careful not to injure the eye during the work; and for the incision of the spatumile as we said in the nail incision and with small forces from which one removes the swelling, as this chapter shows after. When the incision is completed and all flesh is removed, apply salt water or distill red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and place a cloth soaked in egg white over the eye to ensure it remains hot; if nothing persists and the wound heals, and you doubt whether there is a hot abscess, leave the eye untreated and treat the hot abscess with things that soothe. Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus remove additional flesh from the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But still, it must be that you tend to the cure of each weak eye from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb suffer from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If the veins are red and cover the eye, and tolerate the work for vision and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Thus it is for the first that you look to see if the eye, in which redness is, is free, and there is no other disease besides the redness; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side, then suspend those veins by one inch according to your wisdom, and let the inches be doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be one ounce by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after hour until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the forceps, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and let your work be very hot so that it does not harm those veins; and when you have done this, distill in the eye a mixture of green and red colophony to corrupt what remains of the blood.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot coil all those veins in that hour, apply a plaster to the eye using things that alleviate pain in the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pains are alleviated and you are assured of the warm abscess. Then resume according to this method which is described until it is healed; and this is the form of the forceps.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire (or abscess) is called "arissati" fistule: when you cure it with cautery and medicine using the method I have already described, and if it is not healed, you must cut into the abscess, in the place where it should die, and draw out all the moisture that is within it, until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is revealed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, insert the entire instrument of which this is the form; and it is called "aspre chief" and should be made from iron indented like a file, and should be pointed like a rasp as shown in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone flap on the wound, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a bit so you know that the corruption is removed; do this once, then replace the bone flap with medicinal desiccatives.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is healed and flesh has grown, and the core of the bone is sealed, let it remain this way for 40 days, and it will not re-open and will not become an abscess, and no bad accident will come of it; know that it is cured. If not, there is another method to restore the fistula to its original opening as follows: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and water medicines, and when uncovered, take the axe according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the handle be thinned to a point as you see in the illustration.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone of the inner eyelid, and keep your hand away from the eye a little, then turn to all the forest [i.e., the area] until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the veins are there; and then restore the head with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bones, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction in the nose or atrophy, you must bind the patient. Then heal them, and place cups or a hollow reed on the nose without piercing to suck out the fluid. Afterward, put anointing paste of myrrh and aloes and incense and sarcocolla around the eye where the ligature was made. Then drain the eye and plaster it with bandages and cloths. The method for the cloths is that you should use soft cloths, double each one four times, and place them one on top of another according to the amount needed. Cover them with a hard bandage on top, and continue using cups without piercing to suck out the fluid. Remove the cups and allow the eye to be held tightly day and night. If the ligature softens, you must apply it much more. After removing the ligature at day and night, if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not, repeat the plastering, cloths, ligature, and cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the tearing of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the vein, then open and burst, as if by the grain of resin, and is terrifying to see; then if you see it coped, the operations are such that you prick with a needle from the root of the part below until above that part, then prick another with a double thread from the eyelid side; and let them pierce, and leave the first needle according to placement; then cut the leu of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around, and press it well, then withdraw the needle and put on the eye moistened wool in abundance of egg; and let it be until the threads heal with the vein, then treat the eye with things that comfort as long as the wound is healed; and at no time is the wound restrained by the vein in a circle of cloth from each part until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a great appearance, pierce them at the thin spatumile that comes from the depth of the eye, and drain the moist albugine and descend the eyes, and let them enter quickly; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not water that assembles in the eye, seeming to descend like water; and it is not water. The manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat straight, then take the head between your hands from one side, and move the eyelid until you see the bow of the eye come above your eyes; then prick it and do not let it descend, and clear the light, and the patient sees things as he should. And if it does not descend beneath, know that it is water, and if the descents of the bow of the eye are not prepared as we have said, know that it is water.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	place the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make incisions on the corneal membrane along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the bow comes out; when it has come out, instill in the eye hot aqeous liquid mixed with honey, or boiled aqeous fenugreek and honey, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's aqeous液体制剂
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearances of the eye's aqeous fluids in the division, and what needs to be pierced; work according to the health condition.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It must be that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are in the left position, or on your right hand if they are in the right position. Then take with your right hand, if the eyes are in the left position, the instrument called "almagda"; or with your left hand, if the eyes are in the right position. Then place the tip of the instrument along the crown through the thickness of a finger into that part of the black part of the eye at the minor lacrimal gland, then forcefully insert the instrument called "almagda", and turn your hand until it pierces through the black part of the eye, feeling when almagda reaches the empty space. And the measure of the way of almagda must be perfectly in line with the measure from the prunelle to the end of the noirour; and this is the crown of the eye. You will see the bone through that paper by the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument where the aqeous fluid is, and express it through another way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the liquid flows now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the liquid rises again by the second vein, put force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and it does not rise, then extract algamda gently by turning your hand little by little; and then put a bit of gemstone thread in water and remove this from his eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put cotton or moistened wool in oil and abundant egg, and bind with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those of our time, put on with a cloth with abundant egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it hardens so much that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people who have too hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which the form is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then inject the hard substance as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare the patient for sleep in the dark place on his back; and be of no movements, and give light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition until three days; then release him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage on for seven days; and it should not be done during the time of treatment or after incision now, but you must loosen it, because the fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if abscesses arise, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and follow the treatment for those who alleviate abscess; and when it is pacified, you release the vision and place on its face a small skin to cover any day, and let it be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and adapt to its conditions; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made use of almagda pegs, which one applies with water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, because he who does not know them will mistake them; and they should be properly described as:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the cheek below the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes cheeks with various deformities are born or appear under the nose; and among them there are some that resemble scorpions' claws. And if there is such a case where the cheek has a firmly attached dark-colored spot, and the surrounding skin has good coloration.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those cheeks that are merely affected and not firmly attached, you must place the patient between your hands against the sun. Work on their nostrils, sprinkle an ounce on these spots, and draw them out. Proceed until you can sustain the subtle acute pain in one part, knowing that the spot is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that one cannot cope with, open it entirely with the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without exceeds or abscess overshadows, give him the help as he should; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the pus is stanched and all the flesh be removed, then throw out oil easy and oily or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the oil works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, to which the instruments cannot reach: then you must put a slightly thick thread of linen, dyed with our hands, between each joint of the finger by about its width; and place the patient's head where the thread comes from in his nose as much as he can bear, and draw it out smelling it until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times do so with children at school, and it is a light thing for him who knows how to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and draw them out in order as we are by the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it so that you know the nerves have spoiled that flesh, then take the thread, wipe the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments rot all that remains of the flesh; and then put a stick of plumb in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, into which one distills the eyes and medicines or plumb.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be made of silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and guide it thus; and if you see, make it a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; have one hand on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	many times a disease arises at the top of the nose called "telul," and grows and becomes large; so it appears as something to be seen. Therefore, you must cut it off at the beginning, and completely remove it, then apply the cautery or burning medicine over it; and if one delays cutting until it is large, one must beware if it is hard, of a fugue color, or of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron at all, for it is an embedded abscess. For when one cuts it even once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscesses are due to suppurative infection, not of a fugue color, and you can see that they can be completely cut out, empty the patient and cut with fear, then cure the area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to any [person], one must examine if the wound is fresh and contains all its blood; then join the two edges with a stitch, and treat it until it heals. And if the edges are already dried on both sides, one must cauterize all parts of their core until they heal, then join the two edges with a stitch, bind it, and apply powder mixed with dragon's blood powder and pounded incense; and place on the powders a piece of strong plaster or another binding plaster, leaving it until it heals by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of suturing is such that you join the wound: either with needles, as we have said in stitching the belly; or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	By hand, abscesses in the lips appear, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; then it must be that you turn the lips, incise each one separately, and remove them with forceps, cleansing each part; afterwards, apply a leach after cutting with vitriol powder until the blood is stanched; and then apply linen, and treat the wound with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, a sore arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; you must hold it with tongs and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then place on it a broached vitriol stone, or other drying powders; and if this sore returns after incision, as often happens, you should cop it again the second time, and cauterize: it will not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cop.
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellowish and rotten, as the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is foul-smelling; you must place the patient's head in your hands, and his chin on your knee, and remove any teeth or scabs visible, until nothing remains; and similarly do for the blackness and the greenish color, and the yellowing and other stains, until they are all removed; and if what is there according to the first reason is good, it is well; but if not, restart from the second day and the third, until you have completely removed them; and know that the teeth need various forms of instruments for removal, depending on which one is shown by the work, because the rasps used to remove teeth have different shapes from those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You must delay the treatment of the tooth in its pain as long as you can, for it should not be done at all; for it is a very fine substance until such time that one cannot justify the removal.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to treat, it must be that you are certain of the tooth causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is from a sound tooth, and has the good tooth treated; yet in any case, the pain does not depart because of this until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already often done so with these sirs. And when you are well certain of the tooth causing pain, it must be that you burn around the tooth to all i. spatumile very strongly to guard the gum from all sides; then remove it bit by bit with your fingers or with fine tongs at first, until it is thoroughly loosened, then firmly set the tongs; and place the patient's head in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After drawing out the tooth properly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and insert it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, you must fill the holes with wads of cotton, lint, or some other material; and use fine forceps to extract it gently, avoiding breaking it in the process; you must work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part behind, as this can cause the patient greater pain than the initial discomfort.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not act as the ignorant healer does, who, through their haste and boldness, break the root once and do not provide what we have described. Instead, they often bring about serious illness one time through the incision due to the roots remaining or the broken root, as we have often seen. When the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with wine or oil of almonds and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often occurs, fill the wound with vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments to be used first for extracting teeth should be long-pointed and thick-handled, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have thick members such that they do not bend when extracting, and let them be made of well-forged iron, and let them have teeth to hold on to.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during extraction, you should place moistened cotton with butter under the wound for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is healed, then apply the tongs called "algefri," which the patient perceives as a doctor's mouth; and let them be shaped like a rasp, and these are their shapes:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out through all these tongs, it must be that you uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," that is, splint, which has this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and large so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps through this, that is good; if not, you must aid with all the instruments, of which the forms are given hereafter.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if aid is needed from the instrument that has two prongs, which has this form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in the order of the teeth, and from this instrument which seems like large tongs, of which is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument not be broken, and know that many tooth instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters find their own tool by themselves, according to those of their works and the disease that demonstrates to them, for there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of teeth, and if one breaks a bone or another bone, it rots, so I seek the instruments that you must, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-made to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, remove it with this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not in accordance with their natural order, and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know if the teeth were born after the others, and are not in the right place, and cannot be pulled or filed: then pull them; and if they are crooked with respect to the other teeth, take this instrument whose form is as that of a small beak, and made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And gently rub it in your hand for a few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and to prevent movement of the other teeth, and if it is prominent so that it can be filed, then file it with a small file as its form is.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used to make needles; and gently file the tooth in your hand for a few days lightly, so that it does not move as it grows; then flatten it at the end with a flat file. And if the tooth is too sharp and causes the tongue to turn blue, you must file away its sharpness until it is even, so that it does not turn the tongue blue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth chatter
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when the front teeth chatter due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot hold food in his mouth without dropping it, you should treat them with restrictive medicines, but this is not effective; instead, you must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and腐烂，但金线永不变；并且应选用中等粗细的线，既不过粗也不过细，根据牙齿之间的空隙大小来选择。如果需要调整牙齿，你应当将线从两颗健康的牙齿之间双倍穿过，然后在两颗受伤的牙齿之间穿入针眼，如果有一个或多个，直到你能清晰地看到另一侧的健康牙齿；然后再从开始的地方重新包扎，轻轻地、仔细地抽出你的手，直至不再移动；并且应将线固定在牙齿根部，使其无法逃脱。
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the shoulder of the thread with forceps, and assemble them, and replant them between the healthy tooth, and put them thus so as not to irritate the tongue; and then leave them thus close as they can remain, and if they loosen or the threads break, tighten them with another thread; if they stay in place and serve thus for all their time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment figure of the two healthy teeth, and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, often and frequently, as we have said; and one must not do this except by someone who is skilled and suffers, and once the form of a bone tooth from a bovine is made, one places it where the tooth is missing, and tightens it as we have said, and stays in place and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the hole of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	no such thread comes from the tongue by nature or accident of a healed wound; and the operations are such that you work on the mouth of the patient, have his head in your hands, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous thread of the large vein, so long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from a sudden wound, so you use the lancet and cut that thread wide; and keep that incision not too perfect, for the artery is beneath; and when you have done, lift the head with rose water and almond oil, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen tent; and let the patient gargle each night, so that the wound does not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the bleeding continues, apply broken glass over the vein; and if the vein breaks, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other dressings until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is turning white and there is moisture, you should lance it with an onion and make a small incision with a sharp spatumile, and drain from both sides; and if the vein breaks during your work, apply broken glass until it is closed, then return to your work until all pus is removed; then remove the padding of silk and dress with other dressings until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes cysts in the throat appear, which are called "godath," and properly they are known as two almond glands. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are hard abscesses of small sensation and flesh-colored, be careful not to touch them with iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron at all, also for the discharge of blood; but leave them until they are ripe, and then you may cut them out, or they would break open on their own. And if they are white in color and the root is fine, have your instrument ready to extract them, but first check if the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, seat the patient in front of the sun, and his head be on your side, and let the work be done with the mouth and the hand of the servant between his hands, pressing the tongue underneath all the instrument, which is its form; and it should be made of silver or thin brass as sharp as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take an ounce and fix it in the almond, and draw force above more than you can; and draw nothing from the threads with it, then cover the instrument, which is its form, that seems like strong forces; and thoroughly the heads are curved, one next to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use the tongs, of which the form is:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side, and flat on the other; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner. After the incision, gargle the patient with hot, astringent water, or with warm, easily digestible water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with cold water, or cooked pomegranate peel, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped. Then cure the throat until it is healed; and if other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, cut them in the same manner as the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had grown in her throat, namely the small abscess; and almost entirely closed the throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage, and neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained in such condition for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had to be lanced through both openings of the birth canal.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then quickly, and pierced one of the abscesses with a lancet, then drained it and extracted a large portion of pus; afterwards, I made another incision in the other birth canal opening, and closed her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I pierced these abscesses again, and drained part of them, and only a little blood came out; thus the passage of the throat was opened for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued cutting at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept recurring and filling up the space I had emptied until it became very large; then I bound it and cauterized inside her throat: thus it stopped growing without increasing further; and I left these matters, and let God decide what would happen to her after me.
de l’uve	of the eyeball
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the swelling of the eyeball is perpendicular, and it is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and when it is large and round, it is called "uve.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, and you see that the abscesses are缓解，且是圆的而非长的；并且它是带血的或呈灰色或黑色的，你应该避免切割它。
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it as described according to the manner I have said, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Then place a drachm in the eyeball, and draw it out, and cut with the second instrument as I described in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice and to speech; and after incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is sound.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, you must use some means for the cautery of the parts in fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put their head on your side, and then press their tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned or the cautery chapter, using live water to wash it, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and fill the cavity of this instrument, as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the head have a hair or where one puts the medicine, as with the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine over the eye; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the bile; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it over the eye for half an hour's quantity, until you see nerves and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument into the cotton above the eye, so that the cotton dries on the eye; do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five days. And if you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, do so, and after the cautery, clean around the eye with cotton saturated in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamus and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or any of them in a pot, and add oil, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot place the instrument wrapped according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And may be of silver or lead, and let one of the heads be placed in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed; after which restart often, until the eye dries up, and guard that you do not perform this at the beginning of the onset of hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not perform it during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an eggshell inside the nose for the patient, so that it does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh down on the mouth, and this is a good treatment overall beneficial.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is cleared with the bone or spine of a fish or some other thing. Therefore, you should treat what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you may see the thing move; and what does not appear to you and is laid in the throat, you should make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance it might be expelled by vomiting; or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread. And tie the thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be cleared, and then you can draw out the force; and if it does not come from what we have said, take the plucking instrument according to this form.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the forceps be applied to the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head lifted upwards; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it rupture or dislocate the bone inward; and the patient should move when they spit out the instrument, because they will either move or the thing is dry; if they spit it out whole, or he draws it forth forcefully with the entire instrument equally, until it is completely drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat blood
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No blood from the throat is medicated as I have said in the division through wound treatment with medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after you press the tongue with the instrument I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it off with a very small needle, or with fine tongs suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the patient's throat, then blow hot air from the cane into the patient, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is wetted with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and let it go down in swallowing, and move it often with your hand; and as soon as the blood feels the water, let it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not come out as we have said, subfuse the patient with arsenic sulphuris (asefetide), using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the uvea; do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot which has coals visible, and let it be covered with a covercloth pierced in the middle, and through that perforation are the heads of the instrument; then you cast your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not go out but comes until the juice; and the juice will fall now, and if it does not fall, then you must reapply the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and dry things, and drink no water; and then it is necessary for her to be forced out by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the juice is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has a roughness like sandpaper, so that what it takes, it cannot let go. See here its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many similitudes of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings hereafter in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and incision; and there are two ways of which one is in its very similitude, and of that which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the loaves where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the solid flesh, and abscesses of the lean flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for abscesses, one must not pierce them until the bowels are dead according to their fulfillment; and there are such that it is necessary to pierce them when they are ripe, even if they do not die according to their fulfillment, as those abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them remain until they are rotten within, by chance the ligaments and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or when the abscess is in the principal member, and if you delay the incision until it is decayed, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one should pierce it as it is decayed; and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess that has not completed digestion, except for that which is in the foundation, so that it does not rot completely and become fistulous; and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of the incision of the abscess that is decayed according to completion, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the swelling and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you must make the incision in a place more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens naturally. And let the incision be as long as the body permits, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the solid flesh, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed through completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you perforate before it is confirmed, the body will be lengthened by the venom of the abscess, and it is full of much filth; and by chance the edges and depths may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if for any abscess that is perforated according to the size of the body, as the limb may require.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must use small punctures for small abscesses, and large punctures for large abscesses, and many slits according to the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses require cutting the core, and capping; when it has turned as white as flocks, and is softened, you must do so as with buboes: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those that are capped like the leaf of myrtle, as for angry abscesses; and if there are those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar capping.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, as in the case of an superficial abscess, it is necessary to pierce them completely; and when the abscess is large and has gathered great pus, if you pierce it, you must not drain all the pus at once in that hour, but only part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, and again drain some more; do this many times gradually, until the pus exits completely; similarly, if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman who is pregnant, or small children, or old and decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For if the patient starts to shiver once with the discharge of pus, it may cause the patient to die, and you will not know this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a complete cut, apply linen tents or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many openings, you must place one tent in each so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin and covered it over, you must fill it with old cotton or ointment of linen rags without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water and ease it, and moisten with soft cloth, and place over the area bleeding repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, and it is managed and treated, and the powders that I have said to use in your hands in this book, and if it is or tends toward winter, and the head or the abscess is very nervous, then you must place on tents and moist cloths in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the head is fleshy, then you must place on moist cloths in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, up to the third day, as we have said; and then drain the abscess and clean and treat it as necessary until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: or I have already told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of the shoulders
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses appear on the shoulder, and their appearances are like thin webs, similar to the threads of a spider's web, and there are many that resemble them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Some are fatty and round with moisture like peas; and some are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the shoulder are such that you must test with any instrument called "enterotomist," from which the form follows, and what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, let it out from above through the long incision.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, burn without leaving any skin where the moist substance was contained, for it will dislocate again if nothing is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise, use water and salt, and apply it to the wound, letting it remain until the next day; and this will remove what remains from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the application of cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds within grease, shape the poultice according to this form, long; and apply all your ounces, and burn it from all sides, and devote all your effort to drawing out the grease where it is located; and if the artery acts contrary, do as I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so for the abscess if it is stony, and to cut and to treat as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting on the stony abscess and the moist part, it is less painful, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or heads do not have any moisture, and among those I treated was an abscess from an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if one had injured it at all, it would have also done as much damage as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And in other abscesses coming or heads, those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the highest dependent part, to allow the fluid to flow out; and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	of the glands
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, beneath the armpits, and on the groin, and sometimes appears elsewhere in the body, they are swollen, and are joined together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each gland is properly within its own cavity, like the lymph nodes and abscesses in the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these glands are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see in good condition upon touching, and resemble the color of the skin, and move in all parts and are not hardened at the side of the neck nor near the artery nor the vein, and are not deep; then you must scrape from above, and burn each part, and draw the two lips of the wound with needles if needed, as we have said for abscesses in the head. And you should incise little by little, and be sure that you do not scrape the nerve nor the vein, and that neither the spatiumile, agus, nor trenching are used, so that your hand does not slip and go too far, so that you do not scrape what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you puncture the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, put vitriol powder or some other blood-stanching powders in the wound, and bind the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are pacified, and the wound becomes softened and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is staunched, return to your work until you complete it; then rest according to your proper indication if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, and lance and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not advisable to puncture that swelling at its root. Instead, tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall by itself without harm. Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, since there has been no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is necessary that you cut the root of it, draw out the foreign body, and suture it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce them where they naturally open; and pierce them as was said before, hanging down, then apply wicks with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, continue the treatment with ointments and such until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrophula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have scrophula, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglote" be performed; and if no help comes from this, because all the veins and the pommons of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the ampyllae.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pommon, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it over three or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the size of the cut through the syface, not in the cartilage; and those who are thus are suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the throat to all its length, then cut the keur until it comes to the cheneil; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cope the syface as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the cheneil which leaps forth through the place that is ruptured, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is doubted, bring together the two edges of the wound in the heart, and suture it thoroughly beneath the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely suffocated, and the patient is judged to be dying, then proceed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then lift the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus guarding against death; and for this, the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness passes, and it passes in three or four days. Then they ordered to suture and treat the wound until it is healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a lady took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe; and I was called to perform the cure, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it. I was certain that she had not cut a vein or artery, but rather the windpipe was injured by the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and stitched the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and the lady did not suffer from hoarseness, and recovered her normal voice afterward; for this reason I say that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large windpipe
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like that of a hazel nut, and it is very common in women; and according to two ways: natural and accident; or natural has no instrument.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to two ways, of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from within the artery; and there is fear, and it should not be operated by making openings except in those that are small, and he proves and seeks through all the intervening parts: if you find it as fatty, and cannot reach any vein, cut it out as one cuts fat, and draw it to its full extent if there is any; and seek well at once, and cure it as it should be until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many manners of us are, of which I will speak all the similarities; and now it is time that I say all the difference that is between us and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is heat and fever holding on until the ebullitions have passed, and the putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the us not having heat, fever, or pain, and containing the syphas, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, it also begins like a swelling and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, or fat, or moist, and much of the color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its form will show or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you probe or more moist part of the lump you find in the abscess, and turn your two instruments little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then do so according to the size of the abscess; then extract the entromissoire, and take care that it does not rupture.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture comes out clear, of whatever color it has, pierce it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after extracting the entromissoire there is no more moisture, know that it is fatty, then pierce it crosswise, and remove it with forceps, and slightly cauterize each part. Guard the cloth where it lies, and treat it well with the new wound; and if you cannot treat it well, cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains nothing, it returns to us many times; and if it remains a little, and the wound grieves, fill the wound with some corrosive powders wetted, hold the wound, and place hot abscess-purging things on it until it is healed; and if the wound is large, suture the two lips of the wound, and heal it with those that cause growth of flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beating is against you or another makes you hasten and use the juice of pounded vitriol, let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to the copper that was left from the new one.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the intervening instruments, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small. Among them, there are three square ones called "albaret," and one that is called "breb." These too come in three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistula. They are also like the needles with which one sutures veins, made of yellow brass or iron or silver. The yellow ones are more proven for encircling corruptions of fistula. They are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the oncines are similar in appearance, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and among these, there are oncinés with two notches in three ways; and those with three notches, also in three ways; and those with two notches, and some with only one notch, all of which are of three kinds; and all of this are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of those for which they are used is the blade, and among these there are such that cut only slightly from one side, by which one cauterizes the nostrils, because one does not incise the vein nor the nerve; and these introducers are the alembics placed in the handches, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses none other force in the carnut places, such as legs, arms, mamelles, and at angles, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling shells of hazelnuts, according to this form, by which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed once in its place where it heals by closing the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes it is done according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to腐化，直到看起来像女人的乳房；并且remain ugly and swollen. If one needs to treat them according to this form from line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scald the fat, and apply a medicine that heals flesh to the wound. Then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed. And if the breast hangs down and becomes soft due to its size as in women, cut it open at two ribs above, making cuts similar to those; so that one edge holds the other at the end of each, with the larger line containing the minor according to this form from line .b. to line .g.; then scald the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, as well as what is necessary in the treatment until it is healed. And if it is not healed or the incision is not entirely completed, because the patient cannot rest or due to the discharge of blood, you must fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the pus and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of arrow wounds
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from arrow wounds are like hard scrofula or have lumps, and if they contain moisture, they do.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be lanced according to this form, from the line b. to the line g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess has the appearance of scrofula, lance it as we have said for incisions in scrofula. And if the wound contains bowe [pus], apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sewn shut, many abscesses often develop. This happens similarly with a swollen vein and an abscess. If one recognizes it to be due to the artery, the abscesses are long and well-formed; and when you feel it with your hand, you sense the constriction; and when it is due to the vein, it appears red and swelling; and it is foolish to treat this abscess, especially when it is beneath the ribs, at the angles, or near the collarbone in many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one should avoid treating it with a cauterizing iron. For those who are in pain, one should also avoid it. In the case of swelling from an artery, make a cut above the skin long enough; then work the incision with pincers and cleanly separate the artery from the tissues until it is fully exposed; then insert a needle and pierce it through to the other side, and clamp the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries in the temples. Then insert an intermediate piece between the two threads so that the fluid escapes where there is space, and let the abscess be drained; then administer treatment according to the bow method until the threads break; then treat it with ointment suitable for such cases until it heals; and if the abscess is due to the incision of a vein, you should dye your hand with as much of the abscess as possible onto the skin, then insert the needle into the thread you hold in your hand, pierce it through to the other side, and have the double thread so that you pull it from the other side; then bind the abscess as I have said, or a thread between the two ends of the filament; and if you doubt whether the threads are secure, reinsert another needle under the entire abscess along the incision of the first needle, and clamp the threads in three places; then treat the abscess until the excess fluid escapes, then treat the excess fluid on the skin and leave what is bound; then place a soft cloth in wine and oil, and administer treatments with bandages and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses coming to the artery and vein, abscesses of nerves when they are injured, or through too great劳累使我暂停，继续请稍候。😊如果您有任何其他问题或需要进一步帮助，请随时告诉我！将继续为您服务。
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in joints and elbows where there are articulations, and it is the grief of abscesses. Its color resembles the color of the body, and is in many dispositions with pain; and when one tightens it forcefully, the patient feels great pain, and it is not entirely from within the body, but beneath the heart; and remains motionless in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor above nor below. That which is in joints should not be treated with iron: for fear of causing contraction; and that which is on a head or forehead causes the skin to burst at the spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and incise at its base; and if it is large, suspend it by a pin, cauterize, then remove it and suture the wound, and continue to treat until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	If the blisters are large, suspend them by a pin.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it occurs in the belly and nowhere else; and it is a disease called "fungus" by resemblance. The root is subtle, and the head is large; and there are both small and quite large ones. I have seen men who had two bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no difference, and were white, had fine roots, and were slightly cut open, and they exuded moisture repeatedly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI З., and the work in incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of subtle root; so take at the spatumile large, and let the cautery be in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the surgeon comes often too great decorremens of blood, and if the patient faints, then you hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made piece of flax thread, and place it on the artelul as we have said, and let it be for two days; and then restrain, and do not cease to strain the flax thread until it copes the artelul, and work each part by it; and if the roots are large, then fear to cope directly for the belly, but you may well cope half of it, then cauterize that it does not return; then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cope the thvelul which is of faint color and poor sense and looks like milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess embedded, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is hard
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a fire cautery on a wound or a cut in the skin, and is on the belly and has some of the boils, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from wind; and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the release of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and is a slight thing without pain, easily discerned by various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the release of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when pressed at its roots, it rises and then returns. Sometimes it swells greatly upon entering the bath and through strong effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and clearly apparent when you press with your hand; it does not constrain much. And if it is due to blood, it is clearly shown by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and inserted according to a quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is swollen upon touch, and the works are such that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let the treatment proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the boil, you must instruct the patient to vomit their bile and be extended straight. Then he should vomit all around his mouth; then command him to lie very still between your hands. Proceed to extend the length that you have signed for all the spatimile, then place half of the abscess above at the large uncine; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a cord of fine silk, and secure it in place. Extend the other half of the abscess above the thread, and place your index finger to quiet the intestines. If you find it caught by the thread, release it, and let the intestine drain out through the abdomen; if you find the boil, take it with the uncine and drain its superfluous contents. If the artery acts contrary or the vein does, proceed gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads. Place the needles in a cross that you made where you pierced before. Then extract the abscess through four lengths above the needles. If you see this, remove the needles, and leave the length until it rots, and remove the dead flesh by itself; or you may cut it when it is fine and rotten, then treat the wound as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said. Extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the length as necessary, and close the length.
dou chancre	of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the similitudes of sores and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one must avoid iron cure. We say that sores arise in the thigh, and great caution is needed in their treatment. The ancients said that when sores are on the body where they can be scraped off like those on the nipples, thigh, and similar places, one should completely remove them when they are in the beginning stage; and when they are large and old, it is not advisable to approach them, for I have never seen any healed from such sores, nor have any been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is on the body where one can remove it, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him sanious if he has evident overfilling, then prepare the patient well by letting him lie on his side to perform the operation; then throw off the tumor or sore, and the hair from all parts, removing everything without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and wipe well the body with your hand or some other thing, and if the bleeding contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood is stanched; then treat with another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already said in the division of the signs of dropsy and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each sign, and the cure by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only cleared up; and one must not use iron in these two signs: namely, tympanites and hydropsy, because they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this sign of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not help, see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy, such as an immediate solution of the belly and similar things; then do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient in great strength, and he has only the illness of dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then work thus: hold the patient straight with your hands, and the attendants press the abdomen by pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the spathamine thorn according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let it be pointed, and in every way not so deep that it can come just to the intestines when inserted, and cannot be closed; then look if the hydrocele is inguinal towards the intestines: so you must cut upwards from the scrotum three cuts right under the knife; and if the hydrocele is due to the disease of the liver, your incision should be on the left side of the scrotum three cuts; and if it is due to the groin, then on the right, and it is not fitting that the patient lies on the incision so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to that weak side; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push out, and lift your hand from all the pus between the skin and the scrotum as if scraping in quantity of a nail or slightly less; then pierce the scrotum until the pus comes to the right place, and this is the outlet for the water, then drain it, and use this instrument of which this is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver needle, and is made of light brass or steel, and is placed below the small hole; and on one side, three holes; two on the other side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers cut the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	On the head above is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the edge, it goes just a little more over the instrument; then fill it halfway or a third part, for if you fill it more than necessary in this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit by the weapon, or he may swoon, or come near death; but fill according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse; then withdraw the instrument and hold the edge, and it is held now for the cork that stops the hole which is above the syphax, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reapply the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw a small quantity of fluid; do this any day, and be careful not to follow too much until it no longer remains but just a little fluid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water in him, cure him of the sepulchre or sand heat, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and take care to let him drink; cure his medicines with desiccative remedies until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping up of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have any perforations in the urethra, or the perforations are small, or they are not in their proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce him soon as he does not have any perforations completely according to this very fine form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place or puncture the small hole in the plonc, and secure it and keep it so for 3 days or 4, and when it is time to urinate, remove the closings, and allow urination, then replace them; and by chance this may not be necessary, as the urine that comes forth does not leave the closings closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the hole is small, it should be treated with a cloth of plonc, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hole in their place are bleddered, because none are born with the hole at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come down to the anus, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then the head of the spear and the shaft are also as large as a feather's length, so that the points completely pass through the middle, as it should; and beware of the continuous flow of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the spear
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the spear, and they are a sign of ugly flesh; and among them there are both malignant and non-malignant; so you must incise them with a sharp knife, cut and clean them completely, then place soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then treat them with diafinicon ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when you have taken it out, and if the ulcer is in the groin, and has part within the skin and part without, you must remove the ulcer that is within first; and when it is dressed, then dress what is without.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you dress it together, it is not assured that the head of the groin will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the groin and wound; you must cut out all that is black and corrupted, then bind with a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranate peel and vinegar, and dress with other plasters until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding comes about, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery aids in two dispositions together: namely, in bleeding and in corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a linen thread into the penis and urinate for the patient; and when the hair is reversed at the head of the penis which occurs for those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then it must be that you cauterize with a smooth instrument until the threads are released, and free the head of the penis from all sides; and if this is a severe matter to describe, then it must be that you cauterize with a spatule slightly at the tip of the head of the penis and the skin; then carefully separate between them, and place a moist fine linen cloth in cold water over it, so that it does not reverse again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the opening of continuations like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the most gentle for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have it only as what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision with dilators, forceps, and a single pair of scissors; they found it difficult because there are two layers, and by chance one might cut through the upper layer and remain on the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is copious, and the pain is doubled, and in the dressing which is from dal (a part of the body) the points of the limb are not assured; and in the dressing of the nail by accident the iron escapes, and work runs amok, and often such things arise when they have no need for dressing and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the dressing which is done at force over the entire length of the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the threads cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, cut equally along the whole length of the thread; but that the threads be very thin under the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child, if it hears, think that you are only securing the thread around the shaft just in one place, and let you strive in all ways that you can; then take the thread between your hands straight, and repose the forces under your feet or beside your hand where the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or suck, and draw it up until the heads of the shaft are out; then dress well of the filth which is gathered, then tie the skin signet with a double thread, then tie under one by one the threads; and hold at two doths in the second hour at the pocket and at the index, and cut between the two threads, then lift the keur quickly over and draw the head of the shaft; then let the blood run little by little, for this is the most dangerous; and put powder there and on the powder glue a half egg yolk of hard-boiled egg in rose water, confited with rose-scented oil well and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure from another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forceps for delivery is this: the two heads should be sharp and so the heads of the forceps should be as large as the fingers are equal.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in delivery is when the head fails to pass through the incision; therefore, you must stretch it with your finger, as the fingers make an abscess; and hold it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, hold it with forceps, and then stretch it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for three days, and what is below the scrotum is swollen, let it be so until the abscesses have subsided, and gently cauterize; hold it as you can move, and take care to avoid the part of the scrotum, as this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the limb of wounds sharp from powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if one copes too much out of the heart, and it goes above, it will not harm; cure him therefore as we have said, until it be healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is due to stone passage, or congealed blood, or bowels, or new flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone located at the neck or base of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to bend their knees; and place his feet on the back, and extend his belly above the back, and restrain the patient so much as he can; and thus is forced the neck of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, for which reason the urine is relieved; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with the entire instrument called "syringe," of which its form is: and it should be made of fine silver light in weight like a feather from an eye; and let the handle be half a palm long, and should be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method for the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a little wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and stop the excess of wool and pour it just to the head of the thread, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on the chair, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then cover the penis above backward toward the mouth; then pour the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel the urine coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because those who guide it are twisted; then withdraw the thread little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make the urine flow; and continue the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and restrain the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is present, and you see it discharge acidic and medicinal liquids, then make use of the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; and these holes are placed so that the medicines may be perfectly introduced into the urethra to anesthetize well, allowing for the expulsion of moisture when needed. When you see your medicines dripping into the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out slowly. By doing this, you will expel the moisture from the catheter, which will then enter back into the bladder, making the patient feel the effects; and this is the form of the subtle clyster used to treat the bladder: as shown here.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of steel, and the head is higher; beneath it at the chest where the threads fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see to moisten the bladder into it, then tie between the two chests forming a single double thread, and heat this thread with the moisture over the fire; then insert the chief of the plug into the tube, then draw your hand over the bladder until all the moisture is applied appropriately, so that the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert the strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles the nail, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; do so as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture flows to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and we have said the difference between a stone that is dissolved by urine and all the signs, and what kind of stone one should operate on in terms of size; and concerning the bladder, and the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is dissolved in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine has lost its subtlety, seeming thickened; and it appears as a painful burning sensation, and weakens the patient's penis, and often causes discomfort; and most of these stones are in the base; and the healing of children's stones up to four years old is light, but it is very difficult for older individuals, and intermediate for those between childhood and old age; and the treatment is lighter for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it must first be cleansed by enema to remove all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it obstructs sometimes in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift and move them out of place, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and passes once upwards; then have the patient sit between your prepared hands, and their hands be under their thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then hold it and touch it internally; if you feel the stone in the space, now hasten to incise over the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not pass with touching from top to bottom, soften your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is enfeebled, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adult. Then lift it to its base, hold the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press above your finger, and place the incision where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upward, and remove the skin beneath the kernels in the part where the incision is made; then he should pour the sponge soaked, from which this is made:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the incision between what is between the kernels and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left navel; and be straight above the stone, and let your fingers be close to or on the fundament, and make the incision through so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance the pressure may cause the finger which is on the fundament to slip out with effort; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: they are difficult to extract; and there are those that are beneath, resembling a glans and round, from which the release is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those who have angles and margins, make the size greater; and if it does not pass, you must clamp with pincers that are as sharp as a file at the head, to move and extract the stone so it does not escape; or you insert beneath the instrument a slender curved hook at the head; and if you cannot manage it thus, you enlarge the hole somewhat, and if the stone is smooth, you extract it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, you insert first the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cope on top, then pull through, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must cut it out, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out through it so that the bones cannot unite; but nonetheless you must strive to cut or remove with pincers as much as you can piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, bind it, and place a wet cloth over it in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then revive the patient on his side, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, arise much well the oil and water, then treat with Dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosions come into the wound and congelations of blood in the bladder, and are thereby retained by urine, which is known to pass without a jump with the urine: therefore put thy thumb in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder; then wash the wound with water and oil and salt, and aid it in all ways as you see fit until it is healed; and it must be that with all ointments thou curest it, that thou liguest the two thighs, and assemble the medicines over the head.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, and urine cannot pass; you should cure as I said before, that you cut many times, excusing the cut by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this thusly.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron implements according to this form and fix them at three angles in the poker:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then take the thread and loop it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the drill gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and turn the drill in your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come forth soon; then press your hand above what remains of the stone which is within the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken soon, and is struck with urine, and the patient recovers; and if you cannot do this for any reason, tie a thread under the stone and another above, then place the rod at the stone between the two ties, then strike out, release one of the ties, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often it happens that a stone forms in women, and if it happens even once, the wound should be treated carefully, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will submit to examination, especially when she is secluded.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more hardened than the man’s, for which it must be cut deeper, and great fear comes with it. And if necessity arises to those, you must seek a wise midwife, and find her among them, and if you do not find one, then take an extremely clever surgeon; and present before the women a safe practice or a woman knowing part of the art, and command her to do what you command about inquiring the stone; and carefully watch whether the woman is a virgin: then she must set her foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain her under her foundation, and command her to set her foundation or con the patient, and find and press her left hand over the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it must be moved greatly from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, let what is prepared there appear, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your hand over or under the stone, and make the incision first small; then put the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound as much as the stone can issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound will not close, put vitriol powder on it and keep it for an hour until the wound is healed; then return to your work until the stone is extracted, and have the instruments I said you should have for those aiding you in your work; and if the wound will not close, and it is from the artery that has been cut, put powder on it and bind it with linen and cotton, and do not attempt again, and leave the stone alone and do not treat it, lest the patient die by accident; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling has gone down, then return to your work until the stone is extracted.
de hernie carnouse	of a fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white vitreous humor, which is outside the heart of the embryo, containing the egg; and it is called "vitreous humor," and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks it to be another egg; and it is the skin of the embryo between the white vitreous humor as we have said; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the embryos, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the embryos, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often; and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white vitreous humor as we have said, it is the sign of ripe abscesses, rather long like the figure of an egg, and does not rupture the embryos, for it has moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, the abscesses are treated with part of an egg, and because of this, one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white yolk, one perceives it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you test it with a probe as described earlier.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the probe, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be well anesthetized according to our power and the fullness of his body; then place a pillow on his back, on something slightly elevated, and put cotton under him. Sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs of the joint skin; then take the hot spatillum and cauterize the skin of the joints along its length until near the knife, making a straight incision in the skin of the joints up to the white yolk, gently scorching it according to your power; then make an opening wide enough for liquid at one large perforation, and drain all the liquid, and then put in stitches, and elevate the syphagma upwards; and do not touch the heart of the joint, but only the syphagma; cut out all or by pieces precisely from the side of him, if you do not cut well securely, the liquid will return; and if the egg has burst during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syphagma; then sew together the two leaves of the joint heart with one seam, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensory, doubting the hemorrhage; then scrape the chorioallantois completely from the suspensory part, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the abscess is assembled in two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; then scrape the other part as you did the first equally, and wipe away the blood, and put oiled wool into the wound; and place another layer of wetted wool in wine and oil, and put between the two chorions, and cover with folded cloths, and bind it all according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and line them with torn woolen fabric according to this shape, sew them together at the waist of the trousers, and one end of the shoulder is placed on the fundament up to the back, and the other at the part of the armhole; and the other two ends are placed above the two angles, and be completely assembled by restraining in the loop of the trousers; and this branch is often medicated with a fire cautery instead of an iron one, and it is that you use the sharp cautery, and scrape the skin from the chorions, and heat them as we have said, so that the white serum containing the abscess is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and puncture that serum with the points, and scorch it with this sharp hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cloth in all manners that you can, until you dry everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more saved; and move guarding from flow of blood, and moves that the works of cutting; and if nothing makes contrary to you, or abscess comes on or flow of blood or other thing, so cure what makes contrary to you, according to those who are said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, then administer perforation as I have told you. When you are certain by the signs that we have said indicate a quinsy, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at any part below almost the entire length of the sternum, and place the opening along the long axis of the body; let the perforation be wide enough so that all the fluid flows out. Then put cotton over the area and bind it, allowing the remaining fluid to drain, and continue to treat until the wound is healed. If the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a pen or instrument used for draining in dropsy patients, as described before; widen the incision further, and know that the fluid will return and gather after about six months or so. When it has gathered as before, the patient's days will pass without issue.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the roots
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	In this section there is fear in many preparations, which makes it seem to me that one should leave it as is; and I will tell you the procedure and similar matters of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from wounds, and especially from the roots; and this happens by much chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to say that it comes from excess sour and watery substance, which spreads to the roots, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body; and it does not find any pain, being a severe abscess; and by chance it may be a green and stony abscess, of fading color, and sometimes comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess, when you press with your thumbs; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Who is caused by swelling of the vein is known by its arrangement at the expression of the touch of the thumbs, and can be clearly cut on this appearance, and on other similar parts; and you must take out the core of the egg, then let the yolk be on top, and the thread of the white so flat, and release the suspender from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hard in these parts, then you must cut the egg and take out the core; and if it is flat on the side or inside the vessels, then you must release all that is contained, and roundly take out the core.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the wound of the flesh is open behind, it is necessary that you cleanse it entirely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, dress the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, and continue to treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the armpit
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping that resembles a borjon, with the armpit being softened. The patient experiences pain intermittently; and the treatment for this disease is well applied similarly to the one mentioned before, and we will detail the work of it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you place the patient on an elevated seat, then wrap the suspensory ligament around your two thumbs, over the vessels near the groin, and tighten them; subsequently, cut a spatula with a sharp, wide blade across the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from all sides as we have said in the extraction of arteries in temples; then insert a needle where it has to be, tie it at the first site where the vein appeared, and again tie it at the other end; subsequently, wrap with thread straightly according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt moistures; then treat the wound as in cases where blood is drained, so that no vessel is severed that nourishes one of the testes; for from this there does not come any harm, but if it happens at all the vessels are full of blood, it is necessary to drain both testes; so that the testicles do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels and dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the uterus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are due to the section that comes from the uterus or the extension in the abdomen in the part of the inguinal region, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the groin; and this rupture is either of the uterus or due to its extension, and come from these two manners of causes: by percussion, by jumping, by laughing, by lifting a heavy burden, and similar things; and the signs when it is due to the extension of the uterus are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until near the surface, because the uterus presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The signs are when it is due to the section of the uterus, which causes a sudden onset of pain, and the abscesses appear varied and beneath the skin, because of the discharge of the intestines and the mass below the uterus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the ring is placed with the intestines, and they are retained within, causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron, for which it is necessary to avoid.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of this work is that you instruct the patient to remove the intestines with his hand inside the wound if they can enter; then anoint the neck between your hands and lift the thighs; then place the keur above, and cut all the skin of the coion along its length; then insert the leaves of the waist uncins according to what you need to open the wound, making them such that the oesophagus might be able to exit; then cauterize the face that is below the skin of the coion, until the white face becomes hard visible from all sides; then place your index finger in what follows the coion, between the white face which is below the skin of the egg, and between the second face, and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second face; and then move with your right hand inside the keur of the coions, and let the white face be high at your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the faces toward the waist; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie what is behind the ligament; and rest with your fingers if there is any piece of intestine enveloped or hard white face, and if you find anything, place it in the abdomen below; then take an awl that has a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the rear part of the face, which is after the skin of the coion; behind the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and cover the faces, which are below the skin of the coions, with a strong thread of two fingers; then envelop the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two fingers, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter into it, lest an abscess grow there; then reapply the thread according to the first long thread of two fingers, and after these two threads leave from the face below the keur of the coions the size of a thumb; and continue around according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cover in the part below the skin of the coions as much as necessary, and let it be without corruption and rotting, as we have said before; then apply moistened wool, and place it on the wounds, and reapply the thread as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent hemorrhage after incision due to doubt.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leave the thread until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, then soak it in hot water, and put on what we have said until it falls; then treat the wound with other dressings until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like a screw in which you secure the vessels, after slightly cutting into the flesh; then cut it open in the middle, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels stop bleeding; and treat it as we have said until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the groin, as we have said, and one perceives no pain from the sides. And if any part of the intestines protrudes, it is little, and retracts every hour. Nevertheless, if it remains too long in this spot, the wound or syphilis will suppurate; for when the intestines protrude, they cause extension of the syphilis in the groin, as we have said, because they are stretched, then softened and swollen the sides and apertures; and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said. And sometimes it is cured with a iron in this manner: and that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, and cut the side of the swelling protruding from the large according to the quantity of three fingers; then extract the syphilis beneath the skin which will follow, then take the reed and put it over the apparent side of the syphilis; and press firmly at the abdomen, then suture the two sides of the syphilis above the head of the reed, and suture one and the other; then extract the head of the reed, and do not cover or extend the side no other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then cure it by the method for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, it inflames and treats the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sore is constrained, and shows no sign in the rupture, and the cauterizations are changed in this area, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the joints becomes softened in some people, because the tissues inside are softened, and it is noticeable. When it needs to be treated with a wound, one should have the patient lie on their back, and cut away the softened skin above the natural skin; then join the two edges with a stitch, and if you see fit, sew the excess softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat the wound as other wounds until it heals, and cut out the thread.
dou chastrement	by means of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Chastisement is forbidden in our law, and for this reason, I would not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: the first is that one knows how to respond when asked about it and knows its treatment; and the second, because we often have need to chastise certain animals to help us, as with goats, sheep, dogs, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by fissuring.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform by attraction, seat the animal in hot water until the joints become soft and relaxed. Then grasp them with your hand while they are thus prepared and you no longer feel any pain.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castration: it is necessary that you castrate the animal, and press the scrotum's skin with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut over each testicle once, when you have well burned them; and leave a little bit of soft fat which is under the vessels; and this method of castration is worse than the one made by suction, because in suction some part of the scrotum remains accidentally, causing the beast to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to two manners among men: one is that between the two testicles it appears as the figure of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in its urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and is done above the knife as well as with a rod and two fingers.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you clean all the wounds thoroughly, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for those whose urine flows through the skin of the fingers, it does not require any treatment.
de la tentigene	of the wart
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Warts are wounds displaced on the natural part, to the extent that they are too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is their treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you dye the excess of the wart with your hand or fingers and treat it lightly; and do not proceed too strongly, so that no bleeding occurs. Then continue treating it until it is healed. For another wound that arises at the edge of the nail, fill it and sometimes it may burst, resembling a cow's hoof, hence they called it in olden times "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to treat it, as we have said regarding the growth and the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not known, or the defect is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident due to illness that comes; or it is caused by an excess of heat, or a subtle or thick humor, and is formed in the loins, or in the flanks, or below, or anywhere; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and sometimes the flowers [uterus] to have; and the knowledge of these things is through the gaze of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are close and apparent, feel with your fingers or touch them.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the syphilis is subtle, and it is near the two flanks, you must hasten, and cut thus: put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two flaps, so that the subtle syphilis is removed, and is over the stoppers; then take wool, and fat in oil, and put it on the flesh, and let the woman lie on her side each day, so that it does not heal too quickly.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilis is hard and thick, it must be cut like leaves of laurel with a spatula.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the stoppers are of new flesh, suspend them with a needle and cut them; and use medicines that staunch blood, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, incense, together with abundance of egg; then administer one broad stick of plonc, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus let it be long. Then give him another linen tenture dry; and continue to dress the wound until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a carbuncle brings forth pus, it must be treated according to this manner, unless it is an embedded abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an embedded abscess in the carbuncle, one must not touch it to incise.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without core (intake) commonly occur. And when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into thrombosed; and we have already said in the division of similar cases, their signs, and now I will say those that can receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed ones, when fully inflamed in the carbuncle, do not appear to the touch, except for those cured with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the sore, which one can feel, are those one can treat.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cool room. Then put the altar root in the tongs and its bark in the roots, then sprinkle medicines that restrain blood, such as acaic, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. And if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranate peel and galangal and similar things, and then take farinaceous flour of barley, and mix it with honey and garlic, and apply a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him apply suction cups on the back and breasts without injuring; then take wool, and grease in juice of plantain or juice of agrimony with old wine, and apply it there.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has drained, cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head; you should color it as I have said for the thulth; and then continue to cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the arm pit
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses arise in the arm pit, such as chancre, pierous abscess, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases as I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It must therefore be said in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the armpit, which is not among those abscesses that swell from the bowels; and if you wish to know the procedure of ironing, look whether the abscess is red at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it but let it die until the pain is appeased; and then seat the patient on a chair, with two small stools for his legs to rest upon, and support him behind his back and align his feet at the lower part of the leg; and spread his thighs, and place his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a strong bandage; then apply the cautery to the right side, and bring it to the instrument used for opening the armpit, about which we will speak later. It must be such that when you see this instrument being applied, you insert the probe first to know the depth of the armpit, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it must cover the depth of the armpit with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt; and it must place the nozzle of the instrument above, and test the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened, and it is made soft by hand, you must cover it at the head, with a linen soaked in rose oil, or green oily balsam; and when the bow is evacuated, you must put bandages moistened in oil into the wound; place the edge of the bandage over the root of the abscess, and above the root and above the knife a clean piece of cloth moistened in water or cooked honey; then cure after two days with ointment suitable for this, until it is healed; sometimes lift the abscess and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and arisop root that are cooked.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed over the abscess, you must take care not to apply iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mestier is first in labor that she know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman apply pressure to expel, and desire to smell the air: then hasten the birth of the child; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and comes with its head, and the second follows with it; and when you see these signs, you must gently press her abdomen so that the child exits quickly; for when it descends on its head, the second follows with it, and is cleansed of its superfluous matter by good cleansing; and who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes at no time on its feet, and comes forth through the loins or hips, and the hands, or it comes through the abdomen or side, and is sometimes turned around the neck, and in other bad shapes; it is necessary for labor that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the shapes how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes upon his head through a natural birth, and the woman gives birth easily, and the virtue of her is weak, then place her on a saddle, or let the women hold her; and from her nature, use oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pour the bath between her two thighs where she is formed.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the secondine, and split it at its nail until the moisture that is within comes out; and press her abdomen as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer a wash to the woman with fenugreek muscilage and olive oil; then make her drink and sneeze with condise, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands feel pierced, you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on the seat, and lift her feet up high; then remove the seat from the ground, and support the woman so she does not cry out during the resetting; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child has died, cut the hands with the knife placed before, extract the child, and reset equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child at his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes to his feet, you must lift them up; and then turn them little by little, until they are equal; then place his feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps to the hips, instruct to take hold, and cause sneezing by smelling something noisome; if it is severe, if God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not severe as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly dislocated.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come severe as we have said, take myrtle leaves and silk worm fat, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put the nature of the woman inside and above this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until below the ribs; and when she is softened below, give her a mixture of mirrrh, and put it underneath, and let her have it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then cause her to sneeze and press her mouth and nose, and gently rub her abdomen, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child above his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child takes this form, gently place your hands on it; then massage its neck, and let its feet hang down, and have it lying on the bed; bend its arms gently, and then place its hands on its abdomen, removing the cushions below until it is positioned downward; and if the child does not cry, take its feet and move them into shape, then lift its abdomen upward, then put your hands in; and gently push the child; and command the woman to hold tightly until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child which comes broad as one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must endeavor to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, make the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her down on the bed and straighten her legs; then apply the salve as I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to bring the hand back; and gently push the child according to its natural position, and make her hold her breath, and command her to hold tightly until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the delivery of the child at its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I must instruct the child to stretch its hand, then turn it little by little, and rub it lightly; and when it is equal, place it on the muscular natural tissue of tendon and bone, as we have said, then command her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to stretch. Then make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for the entire infant
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to treating the entire infant in this manner, carefully remove the secondine with your nail until all the moisture is evacuated; and if the child can stretch its face and neck, remove the secondine from the mouth, do not retain it, and move the child; then place the child inside, putting it where it should be, and command the woman to stretch once: then gently rub her.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of the knee joints
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	The knee joints often grow many times, and sometimes they grow three or four; this is not a rare thing, and it happens frequently.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are rare things, and do not live much, if at all. I know these, when they multiply and are separated by the syphilis that devises them, which is attached to the bowels; and sometimes they issue naturally like tumors, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue properly, the treatment should be as we have said, and let the subtle baths work quickly and gently, and do so as it best serves the patient's recovery.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the margin I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it must be that the baile [sage] know all this, for such things may happen by accident; do so according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who has lost a dead child or has an abdominal condition, as I have said in the division, and no discharge comes forth, and you are constrained to perform manual work; it must be that you know whether the woman is of sound health and has no accidents or fears of death. It must be that the woman be secured on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister apply two parts of ointment, which are tied to the bed so she is not moved by the descent of the child. Then, rub the margin of the wound with moist oils mixed with muscilage of aloe and fenugreek, and linseed oil. Then, anoint your hands with these oils and muscilages; then gently insert them into the wound. Proceed with one part where she discharges as is appropriate for the case, and ensure that the child is prepared to descend on its head. If it descends through the feet, insert or poignil at the midriff; and it must be that he apply the ounce to his right hand, place the corbeure between his left thumb and forefinger, and gently administer with his right hand. Insert the ounce into any of the parts we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space; this is the form of the ounce:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then insert it against the other awl, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then stretch equally by moving back and forth, to allow them to come out, and let the awls have teeth to hold them, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, open any of its two eyes and push it into that part, and pull the other part; and if there remains nothing, set this awl or higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to the constriction, you must wrap it with a cloth, until it all comes out; then sew the end of the cloth at the joint of the sole or on the cut, and do this in the other hand and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and the birth canal is narrow, or it has an inflamed chief gathered together, you must place the spatumile spine between your fingers, and cut the chief and extract the inflammation; or you may use a tool called "almidach", which comes with the instruments or chapter after this one; and thus likewise make the child have a large natural chief; and then pull the bones with forceps, and if the head should come out and be held by the forcele, cut it until the moisture that is or more issues; and if it cannot issue, cut it into pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is under its feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the birth canal is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is tight in the belly or on the breast, it must be extracted with a flying bandage wrapped around the hand; and make an incision in the belly or on the breast, as long as the moist parts are present; and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, he pours his hand fully of warm oil, and cuts until the mouth of the wound; then he pours one or two ounces, and draws out forcefully; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, it must not be worked on, but rather moist and greasy things should be applied; and he applies poultices, and seat in warm softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the injury is on his side, and you can put it even, apply what we have said for the living child; and if one cannot do so, cut out forcefully in pieces, leaving nothing of the inner part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the one that we have said about abscesses coming in the brain is given to it, and if the flow of blood comes, then it should be put in cold water constricting, and give him other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an unborn child had died, then I sutured the other [side] over it, and declared the other dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, abscesses formed in the throat, and swelled so much that they opened, and caused great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought long about it, and could not stop the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place a plaster of strong suction, and from it one bone emerged, and after some days another one appeared.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled much, for the belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I cleansed the wound and touched with my hands bones, until the woman was much improved; and the woman lay there long thus, and had a small amount of blood from the side; and I did not remember this chapter only because when the master finds an strange thing, he should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of the presser, to which one applies the books; and to two turns at the two heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Firstly, the horns should be more delicate than those of a restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood. And let the mouth be two fingers wide, and the margin as thick as a palm, and long one and a half palms; between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of the same kind of wood, firmly fixed in both, half a palm long or a bit more; these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the maris to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of pliers; let it have two heads with adjustments as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide. When you wish to open the maris with this entire instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread apart, then insert the two adjustments together into the maris, and hold the head of the instrument beneath her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the pliers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the maris until the bail does what it wills.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely above the skin, and its images are multiplied; and when the user has them prepared, it is more rapid in its work, and higher for men because of its size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not use the instrument without having it prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it must be instructed to the patient that she should grip her hands, and then she should inhale condisi, while you hold her hands at the mouth and nose; and if she does this, well and good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot, and make a hole or cover it, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne, and centoire; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or steeped in water on the fire; then put a stick or hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and hold it until the vapors enter the mare; then make her inhale, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not yet healed, command the maid to wet her left hand in sesamin oil or muscilagin of althea, then put it back into nature, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, take it and extend it little by little straight, so that the roots do not detach during extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then cut; it will come and dry out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the root is too strangled, we have already said the treatment for sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not cured by all that we have said, guard against unnecessarily cutting it out; but what is at the mouth of the root, you must tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with tetra-pharmaceutic ointment; it will pour in and be put back, and will heal. But still, if it smells badly in the stomach and head, and sickens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If therefore suitable fumigations are needed for this: some of the ancients have proven the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retaining flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a cane, and one places the thin end in the nature, and the large heads over the fire; and let the fumigations be upon the coals, and the scab until it is corrupted, and another begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have their fundament pierced, but have an unsightly opening: therefore the bailiff must pierce that syface in the right place, and not pierce it with a sharp awl, and guard the stitch so that she does not touch it; then place on wet wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure with ointment until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, put or pierce a scab with a needle, and let it remain there, and be removed when the child wishes to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this plug comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be treated suddenly: it should be treated as we have said for the needle of alum.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodules, and larger than those coming from the defect of the fundament or between two parts; if there is one fistula or more. And when this nodule is old, it works, producing moisture, white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are Persian; they are known by those who have them through evacuation or windiness when the patient evacuates, and by chance during a bowel movement.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they penetrate fistulas to the bladder, and to the half of the penis; and reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the kneecap.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows if the fistula penetrates to the rectum, and not at all: it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and introduce a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a thin probe of linen or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no fecal matter or wind or urine comes out, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; hasten to clean.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is infected as far as the bladder or as far as the urinary conduit, it will cause the urine to be expelled, and cannot be healed by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And if it is perforated as far as the hip joint, the tenting goes as far as the surface; if there are no tortuosities and the location of the pain, then it is likely internal, and neither medicine nor immediate ointment treatment is effective; in these infected fistulas, there is no cure except labor and the futility of those who attempt to intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	And in those that are neither infected nor ancient, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back; the limbs are stretched up to their hips, and their hips inclined towards their belly; then place a tent of wax or plaster if there are tortuosities, until you know where the tent comes to.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep within the fundament, you must place your index finger there; if you then sense that the vein has been punctured, know that it is a perilous condition; do not work on it much as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	We can certainly heal some, but this happens rarely. The aid we provide, heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula as previously mentioned, and pouring it hot into the fistula until it comes from the fundament; do this two or three times, until you know that the charred tissues have been sufficiently heated, which look like a bird's feather; then cure with wet gauze coated in butter until the charred tissue is removed, then apply ointment to heal and bind.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus healed, and the probe does not enter and perforate to the depth which is the foundation, and between your finger and the probe there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering was; cut off from the beginning of the fistula, and put before the probe, and cauterize after it until it reaches the end of the probe; then the probe will be delivered, and fall; then cleanse those flayed flesh parts that seem like a bird's feather, and let none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound fails and cuts between you and the work, cauterize with fire or medicated water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries, two good things are gathered: namely, the burning of these chars adjusted, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture; then the treatment of tents soaked in butter or ground chives, until the eyes expel the burned contents in tears; then treat the wound with ointments thick and hardening tough char, and they are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just to the point of perfection of its foundation and is distant from the body, bind the do or foundation, and inquire of it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is cloth or fat or chars, or it is about to perforate, there must be no outlets except by will through faith and hope, by administering one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you cut down to the bone, or if you can, bind tents and treat as first; do not go too far to perfection, lest you cut the covering that holds the foundation, and let the excretions pass without volition; then treat as we have said; perhaps it will be healed. Or you remove that cover and cleanse since it is cut away from the foundation by tent or another pointed instrument; then cleanse the charred flesh in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and retain the fistula above the foundation: this will be a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and it is when you puncture the fistula at its base beneath the skin, so take a needle perforated at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you pass the thread twice through it, and insert the needle with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is Persian in the margin of the base within, then draw out the thread from that punctured place, as you insert your digit or base; and pull the tip of the thread, and join the two heads together, and hold them one to another, and let them be for one or two days; and hold again once, until the threads cover these cores that are between two, and dry. Then treat the wound until it is sewn and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it pierce in all manners that you can, unless it is too close to perfection.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to make a copper for the lacing if it is too close to perfection, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spatumile spine from which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not on the other, because what should not be made copper should not be pierced, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways: either they are within the fundament, as grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and often there is blood inside them, whether one or more, and they are beneath the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture, and are often attached with a bit of yellowish water or a bit of blood, and their color resembles the body's. The treatment for those within the fundament is to instruct the patient to go out into the open air so that the fundament can dry up, and the threads become visible; if you hurry, use tongs or your fingernail to extract them, then make copper at their roots; if the wick cannot hold due to its moisture, take them with a pledget, or a cotton ball, or a piece of gauze; then extract them with your fingers, and cauterize above them with some warm powders that are like fire; or you can cauterize them as is said in the chapter on cautery, and cure them with other remedies until they are healed; if the fundament cannot release, apply a strong and bitter enema to wash what is inside the fundament, so that it may freely exit; when the patient feels discomfort, and the threads are dry from the fundament, the treatment should be light; and you should extract them with your fingers or tongs, then cauterize and cure them as we have said until they are healed, and there is no fear of incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must administer the suturing according to this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it in an needle, and then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from another side, and twist both ends of the thread underneath the needle, making them wide; then tighten the thread firmly, tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one to drain the excess blood; then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or ointment on top, place it there, and command the patient to rest; and leave him until he urinates, and when they are healed, apply other treatments until he is completely recovered.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dry the foundation or base firmly
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is a drying up of bile in the intestines, and by necessity of nature, when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you reset at the point of a splinter or under your nail the bark above, which you do not leave moist; then cure it until it dries as much as it should; and if it cannot dry, resume the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals, and may be scorched; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small false appearance on the body, and goes very fast; and sometimes one finds it cold, and feels it like death by trembling, and comes over the whole body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a needle from an goose feather, or a very fine vulture feather, and place that needle on the wheezing, so that the purplish circles surround the wheezing entirely; then turn your hand with all the needle until you cover entirely the wheezing, and put it perfectly, and root out the wheezing from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a needle of spider or iron according to this form, and make it thin beneath and drawing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for hold with the two fingers and press. And if you see, cauterize the wheezing, as is described in the preceding chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the shoulder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Any time the shoulder is dislocated, it is done with silver or copper; and sometimes done with small and large implements, according to those to whom they are applied.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those implements that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the bellies are tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there should be a separation or the bellies are tied as you see, and the shoulder is pierced through; it should have two perforations on one side and one on the other. The bellies where medicines are placed should be from an animal bladder or parchment, and should be pierced all around with small holes, with one digit of space between each hole. Then, insert a strong thread twisted ten times or so into these holes, and sew the belly together like a sheep. When the medicine is inside, tie it in front with a strong thread before dislocating; this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it lightly. Then the ministers extract it together with their two hands until it is completely full, then remove the clyster, and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine seems to come out, let the diarrhoea continue as much as it can; and if he sleeps all night, it will be greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clysterize in sickness of belly discharge, and the medicine rushes to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are or are becoming an abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which the skin is restrained.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division of wound care; now we will speak about hand treatments and medicines according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the joints or parts where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the strike of a stone, and the cut of a sword or knife, or a lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the joints of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the thigh, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each kind of wound, and will begin with simple wounds of the head, because they will come in their own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a thrust, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone impact or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess: so do it quickly sanguineous of the cephalic vein immediately if little blood comes from the wound, and the sainier should be done on the opposite side of the injured part; and avoid the patient's repletion with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not need sanguineous treatment, let the flesh be reduced, and do not drink wine nor eat meat; and place on the wound, if a hot abscess comes, only moist cotton in rose oil or styptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not dried by air or powder, the powder I will say a little later; and if the heat has dried it, place some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like from a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by stretching, then stitch them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, regarding suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and gives way, and can only hold with a little bit, then patch it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, as well as fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotted skin, and it does not reach the bone, then remove all the rotten part, and apply a poultice, then treat the wound; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be staunched without cutting, and cannot be stopped by medicines, then ligate the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light: and it is that you put this powder which heals as though the arsenic had mixed with it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live wax three parts, and make the powder finely; apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly, until it dries well and joins all its blood; then dress it well, and leave it unsullyed, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is sound.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with wax alone, when one does not have incense nor the dragon's blood, but uses arsenic to heal the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the art has changed the wound, even while it was being done, one should not put this powder there; but apply some digested ointments, or pulses made of barley flour soaked in water and honey until they give off astringency; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterward.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other means than to leave the treatment alone and put nothing restrictive on them, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract; and do not apply anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicines soaked, such as boiled wax in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and steeped flax in the same sweet water, and other mine stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, suture and bind it with bandages, then treat until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with flesh, pierce or incise lower down the limb; and if an artery is cut and bleeding occurs, suture it and cauterize where necessary; and if the spinal cord of the throat is cut, or the nerves, and the duct through which the flesh flows is guarded, therefore causing the flesh to move, suture the nerve above the throat bone, but do not touch the throat, instead place it according to its natural figure; then bind it properly, and leave it for a few days, then treat with dry ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, set it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, and let those that you cannot have rot, and be removed when the wound decays and is cleaned; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if from the wound there are signs that the patient will die: then you know that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put in any powder at the first hour nor let it dry for the blood to fully coagulate and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to drain out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so there will come no spasm, nor evil tremor of the heart, nor any great pain; and when you see good disposition, then you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the sores and other treatments until he is healed; and if it cannot heal, operate, then you know there is a fistula; continue the treatment as we should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat what is in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, treat with powder; and if it is close to the bone and has cut pieces, clean the wound, and remove any loose parts; and if they are not loose, let the wound drain, which will ease the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	For the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the abdomen are great and medium and small; from a great wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines come out; and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because we cannot put back the intestines in place once they cool down; for when the intestines swell quickly upon feeling cold, they go back into the abdominal cavity more easily, and for this reason, a medium-sized wound is better managed, as we can more easily return the intestines to their proper place than with other wounds. And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways: the two common sutures happen at the abdominal wall, and the suture of other body wounds and the other two specific sutures are common to other wounds; however, they are more appropriate when used with the abdominal wall suture, and I will describe each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and no intestinal matter is present, and there is nothing difficult to clean, it can be treated in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in a proper manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth with only hot water, or you can boil it in water with cinnamon and cypress and spice, and wash the intestine until the swelling is removed; and once this astringent wine is made, it should be used to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or cooked ale and honey, for with these it becomes more permeable to a small amount; and if nothing can enter, make a small incision in the wound using the instrument with which hemorrhoids are treated; and the first treatment should be used until the cut heals, as we do not need to cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument for making the incision: cut inward along the curve and do not pierce deeply, and here is its form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have protruded, put them back in place according to their natural form in their proper location, if you are able, for this requires movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the area below the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the area above the abdomen, raise the head and hips higher than the other parts. And similarly, if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, place your hand so that the severed part is higher than the other; and thus you must administer what I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is at hand, then have in your hands the pincers that can entirely grasp the tear with its jaws, and close the lips; and this is the common method of suturing, and you must sew a needle or more, according to the width of the wound. Then leave from the head of the wound one do of space, and insert a needle or it has enough strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two jaws of the forceps, which are beneath the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the three ends of the forceps in an assembly. Then thread a double filament through the needle from both sides, then join the edges of the wound appropriately, and again leave one do of space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need for needles until all the wound is restrained. The needles should be medium-sized, between fine and large, because fine needles cut all the flesh, and too large ones cannot enter well: therefore, they should be medium-sized; and it is not advisable to insert the needles too far into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and tear the wound before suturing. Then remove the heads of the needles, so they do not irritate the patient during sleep, and place cloths or pieces of cloth on the heads of the needles for better holding, and leave them until the wound heals; and this needle sewing method is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices with one needle for a second suture, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the forceps into one needle or it has a medium strong thread. When you have pierced these heads all four together, then reduce the needle to the part where you started, in the manner we sew cloth; and leave the thickness of one do between each suture. This suture will heal the person, and I stitched a wound on someone's abdomen that was cut by a knife, which was more than a palm wide, and it contained intestines well two palms wide, and the wound was in the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the priest had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and placed clean cloth twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and thread from one side to the other; when it has pierced through the center straight on, leave the end of the needle at the fistula or stitch where you have threaded the needle, and pierce again from the inner side to the outer side. The understanding of this suture is that you sew as a tailor would sew skins, leaving the fistula on one side and returning to it from another until the suturing is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen precisely describes, is such that no one does it differently. They gather the two parts together naturally and apply the head of the needle to the chief surface of the suture, in this manner: insert a needle or head of a fine needle near, and make a single puncture through that side, leaving the two heads of the suture; then turn the needle, and make it pass from the part from outside until inside, through the two heads of the suture; then make another puncture through from outside to inside on both sides, in other two heads of the needle that are on the opposite site. This is the best method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and no one testifies to it, that one should stitch the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each; and one must thrust one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds. And know that when the rupture is within the belly, the stitching is more grievous than on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, as the surgeon has drawn it, so you remove the intestine, and the gut; then put on the powder to quicken flesh, and if the surgeon has drawn it, you put on any ointment that be present until the wound heals; cut the thread, and let the sinew, and the muscle be sewed; then cure the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, you put on, soon as it begins to run water, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members, it is fitting that you moisten fine linen in tempered heat oil or rose oil, and put it between the layers, and beneath the sutures; and if there is pain or corruption in boils, which often happens, then use enemas of black terebinth wine, especially if the corruption comes to the intestines; and puncture within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the veins that are within it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the head of the penis jumps from the wound, replace it behind as with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned yellow or black, you must ligate the part that is black, to prevent blood from flowing, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ligature, and place the two heads hanging below the part beneath the wound until higher up to ease the extraction when the head falls and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are raw and the wound is small, one can restore it in some people, for I saw that a man was wounded or had his belly pierced by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became necrotic and formed a fistula, from which ran the excretions and noxious vapors; I treated it as well as I could, and continued to carefully treat it until it healed, and the wounds were sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sutured, I suspected that the patient would have pain in his belly; and there was no pain at all, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking. And some experimentors said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a manner: take lint with large holes, then bring the edges of the wound together, and as the lint opens the mouth, place it over the two edges, so that it clamps its mouth shut; then cover the head, and this remains so that it cannot be undone. Then put another piece of lint after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely saturated; and leave the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head is cauterized in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can sew the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine, then do it in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is most undried, and then tie at the head of this intestinal thread a fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and suture the intestine, and knot at the wound; and this way of suturing for worms does not differ except according to the path of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the main intestinal passages, there is nothing that can heal, except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it forms, is universally called "fistula," and especially when it is closed and round.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also closed like the feathers of an eye; sometimes clear round, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times large; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it is only through one of the nine causes: namely, due to the smallness of blood or flesh; or for its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the bones are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine used in the treatment is not good; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or due to the natural delay in digestion, and tardiness in recovery; or there are veins or bone: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the treatments and medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it must be that I teach you the treatment of an abscess which is done by manual means.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that an abscess can occur in all parts of the body; for there are abscesses that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the liver, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and so it is such that they affect the principal part of the limb, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all abscesses of this kind are serious for health, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any abscess that does not come from these sources, and you have confidence in the treatment, and you recognize it, take a tent of iron or brass, if the abscess is straight, pierce it. And if the abscess is curved, search for it with a fine linen tent, because the linen folds around the curvature; and if the abscess has multiple openings and you cannot properly search it by tenting, irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture passes quickly from one opening to another and cleanses it. Then carefully drain it as much as possible, so that you may know whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is deep; and ask the patient where he feels pain when pressed, and where he does not feel it. And when you truly know its location, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the places I have mentioned, then cut it according to what I have said, removing the corrupt flesh and cartilage inside; and continue to treat it until it is healed. And if the abscess is deeply set in the right place, you must cut it completely as much as possible, then insert moist cloths in medicated water, and pour them into the opening of the abscess until the medicine dissolves the excess that remains at the bottom; and then apply ointments with healing flesh until it is fully healed. And if it does not heal by these means, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the abscess, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve is not injured or if the principal limbs are not affected, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the king remain until all corruption is removed, then cure the matters concerning flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and drain again as before, know that you have not gone far enough: so expose and quiet until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot cure it; then there is no other way but to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tongs, do so with an appropriate instrument; and if there are many bones, extract all of them, leaving none; and if moisture hinders this, and there is neither error nor fear, then cut away the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if thou canst not take them out within an hour, put something corrosive on the wound to rot it, and let it remain until the flesh is rotten around the bone, then the bones will have less difficulty; and if it is a great bone, such as of the thigh or leg, reset it only so long as the corruption is entirely removed, then close the wound; and if there is much corrupt part, coming to the marrow of the bone; thou must scrape and cut it all away until the corruption be gone, and then cure it till it be knit together; and I will tell thee of a fistula that came to a man in his leg, so that thou mayst take example and help in thy work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around XXX years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body, such that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it. But the ill people, due to their folly, opened it so much that the abscesses were opened, and a great deal of matter drained out, and it became a fistula, and many wounds continued to discharge bowels and moisture from the body; and many healers healed him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called upon. And I saw his leg and the medicines with which they had treated him, and what drained through the wounds was a great deal; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one went against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with corruption extending to the internal bone; I saw that which appeared from the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption beyond what I removed; and began to heal the wound with medicines for a long time, but could not stitch it; then I restarted, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I removed it, and pondered how to fix the joint; but I could only cut into about a palm's breadth of the bone, and it was reduced to mere flesh, then I healed it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and stitched, and did not need further work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and due to my fear of death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For during the evacuation of blood, it was often bled, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard flesh, and it was well-formed and had no harm or contrary at all, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take a ligature, and draw it tight at the end of the bone that is open, and command someone to extend it upwards; and place another ligature of wool larger than the first ligature around the flesh below the bone, and pull the end, so that you remove the corrupt flesh from beneath, and uncover the flesh where you wish to have it heal without scarring; and place a stick or board under the bone to help cover the corrupt flesh; and must remain tight as one can see and feel the corruption, and continue another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part thereof, uncover the flesh entirely; then place a stick beneath it, and spread the soot from one side to the other of the corruption, making the soot as long as the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut out the corrupt part of the joint, and cover with bone from the opposite side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no old one but to use a splint; and if the corruption is by the knife of the hand or by the knife of the foot, this is very strong, but nevertheless it must be that you inquire about the corruption, how it reveals itself to you; and cleanse in all manners possible, but not such as cause a vein or nerve to oppose; and know that the incisor and wires for splinting these bones are many, according to the structure of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their bulk and smallness, and their hardness; and because of this it must be prepared for each manner of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you which tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; so think about the tool you need according to what is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder pains internally or externally; and when you have medicated the corruption by the treatment of medicines, and it does not profit, then you must cut that member until the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes either from death or from the greater malice, which is due to the defect of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption of the member spreads from member to member, and takes over the whole body; so hasten the cutting, and if it is due to the sting of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar, and the corruption is in the head of the arm, then cut, and do not give it space to come down to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes just to the hand, clamp at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come just to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, clamp with a knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, clamp after the other joint; and if it pierces or penetrates, clamp all of it; and if it rises in the leg, clamp at the bend of the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means but to let the patient die; and the manner of clamping or healing the limb is that you tie above and below, extend some ministers one on the lower strand, and others ministers the other upper strand, and you open the flesh which is between the two strands by a spatule wide, so that the bone be uncovered; then clamp or heal, and put a linen patch from each side, so that the sinew does not touch the healthy flesh, and bring another lesion and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the flow of blood comes when you work, burn the place quickly, or put some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, and bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man: he had a blackness that seemed like burning by fire, and this corrosion came first on his big toe of the foot, so much that it encompassed all the foot; and when the person saw the corrosion, he hastened to cauterize the foot, and was healed; soon after, the corrosion returned to his thumb of the hand, and he came to me, and I placed things conducive to reflection after cleansing the body, but the corrosion could not cease; and he begged me to amputate his hand, and I did not want to do it because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and doubted also that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether and returned to his land, and hastened to cauterize his hand, and was healed; and I did not recount this tale but for someone else should need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh, and remains so long that it causes a great collection of pus; and then it rots and perforates, and from there the pus spurts out, and the bones remain visible, like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as fine thread, and does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches to the bone precisely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you peel off all that skin completely, especially when it is delicate, like fine thread; and does not break due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you suspect that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not yet at the bone, and the skin is thick with flesh, cure it with a clyster thus: first observe whether the swelling is large, and the pus within has a foul odor, then use an Egyptian medicinal clyster made as follows: take almond oil, olive oil, and litharge in equal parts, cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey; then prepare according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and apply the clyster to the swelling, pressing on the perforation; leave the medicine for two hours, then expel it. Do this many times until the swelling is resolved, and the pus removed; and if this medicine is not available, use water of ashes instead, where you take vinewood ashes, pour water over them, leach out the solution, and apply it as a clyster, until you know that the swelling is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot tolerate this Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, apply a mixture of water and honey with some litharge; or you may use honey and wine for a clyster, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine causes the abscess to dry up; and when you have done this, and you suspect that the swelling is well cleansed, apply a clyster that promotes flesh growth in it, which you prepare with unguent diafinit, mixing it with rose oil and wine; or use some medicines and ointments whose properties I have described for treating ointments; if the perforation of the breast is small, and the clyster cannnot enter, enlarge it slightly with a wire, then place an Egyptian ointment tent or basilicon ointment over it until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too large, close it so that only the space for the clyster can fit, and if the perforation discharges pus from above, remove more material lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bow is perfected, do not allow flesh to fill in; and if you cannot cover the breast entirely as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner that the bow runs to the lowest part of the body where it is situated. For when the bow is perfect, do not allow flesh to fill in and if you cannot cover the breast entirely as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner: that the bow runs slightly downward, and leave nothing from the bow; and take consolidative medicines to place over the healthy part, and keep them under a linen cloth that covers all the healthy part. Then cover with force at the site of the hole in the breast somewhat larger than the first, for put ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the hole in the healthy part to ease the bow, and do not remove the large cloth outside until after many days once; and that which is under the hole in the breast, often remove to remove the bow, and know what flows from the bow, if it is venom or little or much, or digested or undigested. And take care if the patient feels pain or no pain, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that sprouts on the hole in the healthy part, know that the breasts are already separating, and approach health; and then let go in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast expels undigested bow [a term possibly referring to a type of food or substance] after many days, know that the breast does not turn [heal properly].
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and those who do the opposite; and if undigested food comes from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not turn properly; and if the breast delays in healing and is distant, apply drying medicines to its substance and dry in virtue, such as anointing diaphoretic, for there is a large part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take anointing diaphoretic, and make it with rose oil, and imbue it with old wine equal in substance; then dry and use it; and similarly make cooked honey better when anointing diaphoretic is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them over honey while on the fire; and then apply in a paste, and place it on the breast, and sometimes administer long roots of celestial lilies, which are like flour of wheat and corn; and use simples or compounded: grind them, make a powder, and put over the honey as I have said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, know that the corruption is completed and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in ligaments; so treat the fistula of this cure, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Pilonary abscess is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or foot, or by chance may appear in other digits; and when it grows old and one does not attend to it, it comes to a head quickly, spreading and discharging pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may even discharge the entire nail; and it leads to corrosion extending to the bone, causing painful swelling of the finger and discoloration.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the wound does not heal, then you must cut away all the remaining nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are much great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick it, and the blood, then you must put a piece of lead under the nail so as not to touch the flesh, and let it rise up, and scrape that thin flesh gently and lightly, and place over the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, scrape it out forcefully, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone decayed, scrape it clean as previously mentioned, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is infected and swollen, and feels great pain, you must first cleanse it; then scrape the nail with a sharp spatulum, cutting across, and be careful that the cuts do not come to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something above it that will soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the shoulder comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The dislocation that arises in the hands of some men by accident is either all fleshed, or has a tear or it has bones, and sometimes an ankle, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birth is in any of our feet.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	That which arises in any part of the foot does not move, and that which arises at the joint of the hand may sometimes move; the size of that which is fleshed is light, cut it in its root with a broad lancet.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which arises at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: so hold with forceps.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born or must have the last cut, it is necessary that you scrape the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and cure it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come from these wounds arise either by birth, or suddenly from a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut this scar, so that it heals according to its natural form; then place between two moist cloths or soft drapes in rose oil, to prevent them from sticking together; or you place between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wounds are properly joined.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the scar comes together with either of these using the palm [of the hand], you cut this scar as necessary.
des vils	of the evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	When his veins are swollen enveloped with excessive melancholic humors, coming from many parts of the body; and more happens in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer one purge of black bile, and then cure him with the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron cure is according to two methods: one is where they cut and bleed the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and let all the black blood flow out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this manner: first, make the leg hot with strong heat until the flesh becomes tender. Then, extract the limb from below the knee to the part just above the knee; next, open the vein in one place, or two, or three, making a wide cut. Raise and let all the black blood flow out by hand from one end to the other, until as much blood flows as the strength of the patient can bear; then close it up, and instruct the patient to dye their skin with meat juice that exudes black bile; and repeat the evacuation and cure when the veins are full and harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The manipulations of the leg are performed in this manner: straighten the limb of the patient, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath. Raise the leg with warm water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over fire, then apply a cloth along the length of the vein from the lower part of the knee to the part beneath the ankle; then cut the skin inch by inch, and burn the vein on each side until it appears when pressed; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then place a wick underneath until the vein is elevated from the skin, then lay it down inch by inch, then apply another cloth above three inches; then burn the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the wick as you did before and lay it down on another inch, as you did first; then cut a different size, or more if needed, then lift it, and lay it at the base of the foot, then trace and lift until it reaches the second size; then extract from size to size until she is entirely free, then lay it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, so insert a needle with a double strong thread underneath, and tie and pull, and place a wick underneath, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes out; and guard that it does not stick, for if it sticks, one cannot pull or lift it, and this is harmful to the patient; and when you have completely treated it, then put over the area of the wound wet wool in wine and rose oil; and treat until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not sew it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron with which one sews the vein is curved, and not cut, so as not to sew the vein; and it is of large curvature, for if it were fine, it would sew the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil where there is no moisture; and by chance it may arise elsewhere than in legs, and this happens from corruption that comes beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms arise within the body between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then the eyes change, and the veins begin to issue forth, as one root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And when the shoulder is opened, it must be wrapped with a piece of lint one and a half to two inches wide, and the bandage, and let the lint remain on the leg, and every time there is none at the end, wrap again with the lint and the bandage; if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder, but do not cut it close to its root, until it is completely out; for if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction, or swelling; therefore, it must be treated little by little until it is fully out, leaving nothing or a hole behind; and sometimes this vein, when treated five inches long, or ten with one handspan, came to me from X inches long, and when you cut it, pour one rag or wad, and pierce through completely so that all comes out; and drain the matter within, and apply medicaments for putrefaction no more than a day, then treat as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes from this vein many pains, and especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or hand, and there comes much swelling; then cure as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers which grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm which grows between skin and flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and bursts forth; and it arises from the putrefaction of some humors, as come towards serpent and worms and ascarides or intestinal worms; and doubt is had of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drawn out, one cannot remove it completely as it goes: therefore, you must tie the vein above and below with a strong thread tightly, then cut and draw it out. If the blood is fully drained in the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; the greater harm it does is that it can damage the eye, as we have said; if you see it coming or near to the eye, tightly hold it below, then cut and draw it out. The patient must use cleansing of body from medicines soluble for the bad putrefied humors, and beware of foods causing fermentation.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windosity
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen those whom I tell of this.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a woman patient, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, as if live silver when it is cut from one place; the pain left that place and lodged in the shoulder, and then a little while later spread throughout her body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that it returned to this side through the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled greatly how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, but I did not wish it thus, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a cold body, and her veins uncovered, and because the winds constrained were visible; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see treating this disease, and the patients feel this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, scrape off the surface and beneath hastily, and then dress until the winds constrained at that place have issued; and cauterize the body. And if you do not see it with your eyes, treat it as that which expels the winds, such as bitter pills, and snake venom pills, and others like them.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows come in various types, according to their appearance and the parts of the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their types is that some have large points, and small ones, and feathery ones, and those that are welded; and some have two angles, and those with tongues, and some with pieces. And the one that strikes any limb falls in a manner: whether it strikes a principal limb such as the brain, heart, liver, thorax, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it strikes any part of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you later, appear: then you must be wary of extracting this arrow, for death often follows in various conditions. And when none of these bad signs appear, and the arrow is not fully removed, you should extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the swelling that is above the brain, is when there is scotomia and soreness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it may be without force from the nostrils or ears; and by chance it pertains to speech and voice; and a swelling comes from the wound white and moist like a pulse, and also as if boiled flesh; and if this sign appears, you should keep from treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty; by chance, the arrow moves like a pulse, and brings black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that Nermo pointed out is that without bubbles of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and relieves the cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the cover of the foot, it affects the small bones; it produces great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls on the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with some undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls on the belly, and it jumps out leaving some hay along the intestinal route, then there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine flows out and is interrupted, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the arm and the collarbone and the throat and the shoulder and the humerus and the thigh and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	If the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as happened to me when I was told, then do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow struck or pierced in the root of the nose: I removed it, and drew it out from beneath the ear's fat, and he was healed without any difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And they drew an arrow that fell into the grease of the eye beneath the paper, and the arrow was embedded, and could not be reached with the point toward the wood, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, light as iron without ears; the patient recovered, and no ill accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And they drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I plucked out the barbs, and drew it out with great care, and the Christian recovered.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And they drew an arrow from the man, who had it in his chest or abdomen, and I thought he was dying; and after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition at all; I cut into the arrow, treated it, and drew it out forcefully, and he had no ill accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish for the one who has an arrow that fell or pierced from behind, and the wound was sewn up; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, nor caused any harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And for the other man, who had an arrow fall into his face, and the wound was sewn up; and remained in such a state to suffer great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And for an arrow that struck the king's subject, who was pierced among the leaves, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely buried. I was called to treat it three days after it was pierced.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with great subtlety, and did not feel it; and there was a puncture and pain near his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed on it a plaster of atrative and digestive herbs, since the eyes were not swelling; and the eye affected by the arrow became apparent.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for several days, and redressed the wound again. The patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow tip within his nose on the following day; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and then examined it; I felt the head of the arrow that was rotting in the eye. Then, I continued to treat the opening of the wound with this corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became clearly visible. It took more than four months before the wound healed sufficiently for me to use forceps to extract it from both sides; but they could not remove it. Therefore, I continued to examine and devise methods using various instruments until I successfully extracted it on a well-made pair of forceps, as described in the form at the end of this chapter, following my treatment and restoration of the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it, and the wound was缝合，病人完全康复了。
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or have I told you of the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything; but master surgeons compare on very little, and on what is present and lacking, find new work, and nine instruments, for the descent of things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are either fixed in the members where they enter: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which enters through the place where it enters is an arrow entering into the flesh, and is never found now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not rot now, let it be until the flesh is rotten through, and drain the issue; and also if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot come out, let it be so for some days, and change each day; then it will rot, and if it does not rot, pierce through to all the subtle part entirely, so that the flesh within is widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the accidents that I have said to the patient: do not draw it out at all, but let it be until it is equalized after some days, for if the arrow comes just to the syrinx, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not pierced deep only into the bone, and does not come close to the surface, and the patient remains without any bad accidents for several days, then the method of extraction should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is not pierced deeply and cannot be removed with force, then I administer irons between them, as I have said; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body such that it cannot be seen, then quench it completely with a tent; and if you feel it, then remove it with an appropriate instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then enlarge the wound so that the arrow can be seen; and extract the arrow if possible, and if there are feathers attached to it, remove the flesh from both sides of the arrow up to the part you can grasp, and then break or bend the feathers of the arrow so that you can extract it; and take great care not to break the arrow, as this would make its extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it be until the flesh between the bones is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the decorrenment of blood causes it to do otherwise, administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve or the vein, and find a way to draw out the arrow as you can without peril, soon or late, firmly or easily; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow fell on him, for this is the greatest help that it be, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or where it opens any part of it, or the skin is swollen in such a way that one can see or feel it: incise there, as far as the forceps can grasp, and then extract it: if it is now ready.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is still in, push the entire shaft; and if the shaft has fallen, and you see that a thrust is needed, then administer the instrument thrust, so that the point of the arrow enters the hole of the instrument; and then push the instrument, and if the arrow is stuck, then push the instrument with the point entering, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touching, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or pierces the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and it is nearby, and you can cut out, then do so; and guard against cutting the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound if necessary; and treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used for extracting arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the quill needle is also like the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for putting in and for knowing so is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins from which we are healed there are thirty-one, of which sixteen have a chief or head, that is to say: two jugulars which are behind the ears, called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the temples and appear; and the veins which are in the corners of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein which runs through the forehead; and the vein which is on the top of the nose; and the two subclavian veins which are at the neck; and the two veins which are on the upper lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the veins which are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins through which one commonly bleeds are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the flexile, and it is that one from which one bleeds, which clearly opens above the pocket.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the basilic vein is the vein that is between the auricular and annular, and it has two tendons; in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the corona of the pocket on the left side, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "necis" that is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The healing of veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is to reset the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a screw so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two loops dependent on the head: hold them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, lance; then take the lancette, make a cut beneath the vein down to the bone, lift your hand up along the entire vein, cut the skin and the vein well twice through, and let the blood flow out until you see it; then drain and bind it until it is healed; and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is worth for ancient gout, stiffness, and accustomed blindness, and in the body of watery tears on their eyes; and the qualities of this health as I say: and it is that the patient withdraws his neck, so much that the two veins clearly appear; and you feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign with your ring finger; then lift the heart above the vein up to your index finger, and thrust the lancette under, and lift the vein up, and the cop, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your necessity; then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then form it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of them regarding their application and their extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sinew of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic sinew for diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness; and its quality is that the sick pull their collar tight twisting, so that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is described here:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then release the sick person's collar, and bind the vein until it is sound, and do not apply a wide flame even once.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	In any case, it is not fitting that the flames be too hot; and let the sinew lie across, for the bone is near, and by chance the flame might break the sinew when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the cheeks helps them, and with coughing, and with redness, and with the orbital part of the eye, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their health are such that the patient draws his vein closer by twisting at any point, as was said before; then the healthy one, and let the healthy ones pass through a little bit long of flame a little bit wide, for there is no part of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break by accident; then make the blood run as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein from the nose is good for water and strong poison, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the qualities of the health are such that the patient draws his vein closer by twisting at any point, then stretches his nose towards your left hand, and takes a subtle long flame, and puts it between the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well here, and the air will begin to flow now; and do not go too far in making it perfect, and make the blood run as much as you need according to your necessity, then tie it for a night, because it is most easily restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The sinew of the two girdles helps in narrowing the alainne, and at the beginning of mingling, and a lot of diseases, and petechiae, and corroding, and herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the sinew is that the patient draws its neck out from under both, as we have said; and let the master be above the patient's head, and the patient lie on the seat, then heal the vein from the long side a bit widely, then draw some blood temperately, or as much as is needed; then do another one in the other vein, then untie the knot, and compress all the veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins around the lips helps in healing sores in the mouth, and prevents gum decay, lip fissures, and mouth ulcers.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of health cause the patient to sit before you, and hold his lip as I have said; then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. They can be recognized by their black color and the small black fine veins near them: cut both of these veins, and if you are unsure, cut the largest vein from each part, and similarly treat the two veins above and below, for they are of the same kind.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health from under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the cephalic vein, and this is in the narrowing of the throat, and with diseases of the uvea, and with mouth diseases; and the quality of the sainer (cautery) is that the patient's health improves before your eyes in sunlight, and it eases the tongue, and you look under each side a black vein: thus both are healthy, and do not go too much to perfection, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the tongue that are commonly cauterized are done in two ways: either by pricking with a sharp flint stone or with a subtle olive oil, as you hear cutting, and is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the size and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame of mirto is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the need to open veins filled with thick blood appearing on the surface, and those containing much thick blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointed in subtlety, and is used to cleanse fine veins, or where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are in the throat, and collarbone, and ribs, and abdomen; and it is suitable for the healer to cleanse by bloodletting and to avoid the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the artery, and bleeding comes, then it must be staunched as I have said; and one should not cauterize with flame, but cut like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilicus does not open clearly, then you must extract it, and replace another; or if you want any vein from it, or to incise a vein in its place: it opens clearly; and cut with the lancet flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the location of the incision, then you must extract the arm, holding it until you feel the pulse; then mark the location with a chalk or similar, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the lancet flame as we have said; and watch that you do not pierce the artery when you see it swollen, for this is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bulge up high as the urine of a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that they are veins from the artery: hasten then, and place your finger lengthwise, then withdraw your finger when the veins have ceased; if the arm is bound, leave it thus, and do not move it the patient; be in fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the veins are not ceased and it pains you, and medicines are not at hand, cut the artery if it appears, for the head of the arrow has passed; staunch the veins.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark from the fisticle tree, split it open, and take one of the halves and bind it well just to the other day; if the veins have ceased, that is good; if not, treat them as we have said, with powders that staunch blood; but the staunchings are not great for many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein in the middle so aids that it treats blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalique, as we have said; and it is fitting for the healthy one that he guard against the nerve which is beneath, and if it points too much outward, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the santes be harmed, and by chance may not heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in any men because of its subtlety, it is fitting that you anesthetize the vein with the instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it open along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The blood of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one must cauterize with a flame of olive oil or a mirtin flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because it does not pass over the nerve nor the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In any case, one must seek the lightest vein and not injure anything if it is needed for the first time, and one can repeat the process; and by chance, the veins may swell in some individuals, even when needed for the first time, but it does not cause injury.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the cauterization is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about cauterization is that it is performed only to preserve health and to avoid future diseases; and the cauterization should be done in one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of prayers on bended knees, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first or third day after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The remedy for the sick has no fixed hour determined, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in every season; and it is not fitting to remedy children under fourteen years, nor women with child from four months until seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Old people who have passed sixty years should not be remedied.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be remedied, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if there is little retained feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines their superfluous putrid matter harmful to the principal members; nor should one remedy those who are too salted with meat, nor those who are drunk, so much as they are intoxicated, nor those who are dropsy cases; and if there is a need to remedy after colic, passion, vomiting, evacuation of the bowels, increase in frequenting women, travail, watching, fasting, or those whose whole virtue, by reason of weapons or of the body; then subtleties of the humors, if the swelling is great, from meat and drink and medicines, if you have the power; then between or after a bath, if anything prevents it, to subtilize the blood, and to remedy through the vein near the third, as we have said; and keep busy that day with work, labor, and lust, and similar things; and be bound and joiced, and let the remedies be higher than those whom you remedy, and rub your arm two or three times, then extract the leech moderately above the middle, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot draw properly; and then rub the vein with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt; then anoint the remedies with a bit of old oil, then place his thumb from his left hand under that vein beneath the swelling where he wishes to remedy, so that the vein does not become injured.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as strings in the body, and some that are full of windiness, such that when one places fire on them, they recoil from the flame and cannot be opened, and thus belong to this category; and if one incises the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeons must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is incised the first time, that is good; but if not, one should incise it again slightly below or above that place, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen and the patient feels better, let it rest for one or two days and do not bind the arm: perhaps abscesses will develop. Do not go into a bath, but continue with the operation if the surgeon deems it necessary; and if the hole is small, or the vein thin and you doubt whether there is as much blood as you see, ignite that very hole directly with the flame, and incise quickly, so that the limb is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swollen, do not restart the healing, and put a bit of oil-juice on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and the oil makes the juice in this limb thin; thus administer the oil-juice in each healing that you heal the veins, to staunch the flow of blood; and the same is done with treacle and balm when put on the limb; so subtlely the juices separate when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes an abscess large, which often happens, even when it is not healed except that time or the opening of the vein is small, hasten, and put on the limb a wet sponge in water and salt a bit warm, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the bleeding from the vein has ceased. And if any black or green remains on the limb after a few days, it does not harm it; and if you see, put on something of aloes or myrrh remoistened in juice of calamus, mint, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance arise in the flesh of the basilica: therefore place your hand thereupon, and if you find it soft under the pressure of the hand, this is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not apply anything of what we have said thereupon, for by chance it might cut into an artery; but make him a dry poultice to harden the flesh, and then treat with other remedies until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it issue until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it continue until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for him who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, that a larger wound be made, and let the flammes [likely a misprint for "flames"] be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and let it be healed little but often, and heal in cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing is saved from running of blood and nerve compression, and is better than long or wide wounds.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him whose body needs healing, it is fitting to give soft bread in juice of pomegranates; if he is heated, let blood be drawn three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, let him eat soft bread before healing in syrup of musk, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it swells in the side, after the discharge of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it sees fit to let the arm breathe and swell another time, it is fitting, when he is weakened by great swelling, that he be swanned a little and a little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who sees fit to let the arm breathe after the first swelling, and if it has strong pores, he should be swanned seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever is to be cured otherwise, must be cured on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and this causes fever; therefore it is necessary to bleed greatly and enlarge the hole until it heals over. After you have rewarded all conditions for healing, place your hand on his pulse when it heals, so that death does not come instead of healing; and this happens many times when physicians are negligent; and it is not right when you see loosen the arm and cause bleeding a second time, and the hole is closed, to press firmly upon it; nor if it is crooked, to stretch the arm hastily, for that would be ill. But let it be until it heals the second time; or you may prick at the tip of the flame, as long as the wound which has been frozen over the hole of the vein has issued forth, and place a little salt in water, and press gently upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not compress it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to treat the blood a second time, let it be done in that same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein in the hand because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of treating it is as follows: the patient should hold their hand in warm water until the fingers turn red; then tie it moderately so that the vein is clearly visible, and proceed to treat it from the side, not from the length or width; make the punctures wide, and suture well near the joint of the hand. If no blood can come out, put the hand back in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; if it is in winter, do not repeatedly dip the hand in warm water, as it should be used more in summer than in winter. The treatment of this vein is safer than that of any other vein, for there are no arteries or nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sickness of the healing of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: stretch the hand, and put it in warm water until the vein is swollen, if one can see it; and if the skin is stretched, and you cover it completely, then do not grieve anything; and do not apply too much perfume, for the nerve is underneath all covered with flesh, and then put the hand in warm water again, if the skin is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn enough blood as necessary for you, put a piece of wool and a seal on the vein to sew it quickly, and do so with each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse [likely a typo or metaphor for a particular condition], and do everything as I have said for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The juices of the sophene are good for all diseases that are below the body, such as liver diseases, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its juice are such that the patient applies it to hot water and rubs it on the vein until it swells, and ties it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot much urine flows; apply it then where there is a large swelling or at the ankle, which moves well.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply it to the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and treat it by cutting through as when tying; let the flaxen thread be anew.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out on its own, put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wound needs it for the first time, restart the second time above a little, because the coals are hot; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do with the sponge of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The coals of the vein are at the ankle for the sciatic wound, and its wound is for the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its wound is such that the patient immerses in hot water, and draws it above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you can scribe it in any way you can, and crosswise; and it is better to twist it because the coals are soft, and it responds very well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, trace any vein from the side of the leg or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let the bleeding continue as much as you see, and then undo the bandage, and place a cloth and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	from the suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or ears, or glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without piercing is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire; and the suction done by piercing and extracting blood is applied in fourteen places of the body, of which one is all around the head; another is inserted into the neck; two are on both sides of the neck; one is below the chin; one is on both shoulders; one is above the armpits; one is on each arm; one is on each leg; one is on each ankle; and suction should not draw blood, but only minor veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone as much as drawing blood from a vein; nor should it be administered either with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess, until all the body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of sickness it is proper to bleed, or for custom, we shall perform it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between times; for there are such as when they have need to bleed, they have a heavy head; and there are such as find fullness and redness in their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes; and such as find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and run blood; and there are such as dream, and see by night blood and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially between the hours of the day, we order to bleed after three hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sinew of the muscle aids in the healing of the fracture of the head... that comes to them, and it should not be used after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in place of the sinew of the cephalic, and it should not be used by those who are of cold complexion or have chyluria, for it does them much harm; because of this, it should not be used by those who watch over, nor by those who have head diseases that are cold.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often use it become forgetful, and because of this, one should place the cupping device a little more downward due to the forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation at the neck is in place of the sinew of the head and the basilica. Because of this, it is useful for narrowing the pit, and splitting the channel of the femoral vein, and generally; and one should apply it only slightly, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind-observations for the second ribs of the neck are effective against the pain of the head, and eye diseases, and migraines, and strangles, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is located in the healthy part of the basilica; and you must instruct the patient to extend his hand when putting it on, that he does not compress the artery, and avoid hemorrhages of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wind-observations over the chin are effective against diseases of the mouth, and gum decay, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is located in the healthy parts of the upper and lower lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind-observations for the shoulders are effective against diseases that come from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosations of the costae are as effective as from three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the sainor that he not pierce too deep, for the lungs are naked of flesh, and know beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup above the buttocks is as effective for hemorrhoids from within, and for diseases beneath. It should be large, made of iron, which it needs to draw well; and by chance, if it were fine, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are effective for old pains in the kidneys, the loins, and the bladder, and alleviate swellings; and they are placed at two ankles and two calves, and in any case, they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis to many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and quickly, and place it hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the skin red and swollen, and perceive the redness of the blood; then remove, and replace the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are such as have thick flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to dilate the passage of the large vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to pierce a third time; and when we wish to draw blood little by little, we merely puncture once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw much blood, we begin often; and if the vein is thick, we make a firm puncture, and the points are such that the veins are suddenly pierced, it must be for those with thick skin and hard, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the eyes of the cups with a pungent and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, use olive oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, mustard oil, or lavender, or chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, take castor oil, or balsamic oil, or pennyroyal oil, or similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one heals by stretching and widening pores, it is not necessary to put any oil, but it must be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or mullein water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or some other similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, so they rise from juniper, or juniper water, or sumac, or similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or sear water, or anise decoction or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not fitting to heal by suction before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; and do not sleep after ventilation, and it must be warmed when he should be suctioned and when he is suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch over those who are healing and are choleric, and if the blood is too active and inflamed; then it must take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces on the outer side, and similar things; and eats grubs, and meat from a castrated animal, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey and moderate fragrant wine that is between old and new, eat little, and eats grubs and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than eat; and it must be given to some men three or four times musk or mace before or after cupping to comfort the principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not fitting that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed without piercing are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and mouth and veins and hip, for these parts do not tolerate being pierced on the eyes, and one makes no fire only to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the nipples when a child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the belly and mouth to alleviate the member; and removes pain, when there is an abscess or stone, it may by chance remove the abscess, or dislodges the stone from its place; thus does it when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck solely; sometimes they are applied together with fire, and sometimes full of cold water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a manner one fills the cup with warm boiled water or water with cooked herbs suitable for it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two inches wide and half a palm of profoundness, with a small hole in the middle to insert an awl, as for piercing a needle. Let it be made of tin, with a spout at the front so that it does not blister the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle let there be a crossbar of tin or iron to hold a wick by pressure, and their sizes should vary according to the diseases and the strength of those who use them; for children's suction cups are different from those of adults, and those of thin people from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one should place this suction cup on the limb: hold the wax or camphor wick, and insert it into the suction cup through the crossbar that is inside the suction cup, so that the flame remains at the bottom of the suction cup to avoid burning the patient; then place it on the limb, with your two fingers over the hole as previously mentioned, so that when you see the vapor, remove the suction cup; and around the hole, apply the camphor or liniment as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup therefore used for diseases of the pleura, there is neither a tube nor a puncture, and it is not applied with force only when it is full of fluid, and is placed on the limb solely; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suction cups are not applied with force only in areas where it is impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare skin, such as palms or soles, and others like them; and the quality of the suction must be such that when you find blisters that are in clear, sweet fluid without corruption, take them; and put one nut in clear water until they soften and have nothing inside; then incise with a vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the blisters on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where you can apply a suction cup, do so, for this is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not so, lift the arm from the armpit, and then with water, very well, and then press it. And if the limb heals too soon after the body of the veins, make a moist linen cloth in cold water, and put on it, until the flesh is infected; and if the wounds multiply, put on broken vitriol or gall, and similar things, until they are infected; or you put on half-cooked peeled beans, and let them be until they dry out on the limb, and will stop bleeding now; and if you have more need of it, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not will take, rub the limb with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the vein lets out, and then put on it, as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry; and when you see that they bleed, sprinkle a little aloes and powdered salt or ashes over them, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear friend, that the knowledge in this chapter is not found in any ancient books or letters; and for this reason, the science has been lost in our land. For I have never found anything good in them; and I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I dealt with the science, and through experience, and from the habit of my life. And I have described here what is contained, abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should state in the prologue of this book the summary of our words and the chapters where the wise place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who have proven themselves may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twists or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary to hasten to cleanse the patient on both sides, if any condition hinders you from doing so, such as bodily weakness, youth, or old age; or if his tension is not too tight or too cold; and let him eat cold foods, that is, chilled meats, and meat of birds and chervil, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill himself up too much with foods that fill the veins with blood until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or discharge of matter from the limb; so the patient returns to rest in his first governance as he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with meats that promote good healing, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, peas, venison, liver, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For in good healing, the wounds close more quickly and the fractures heal better.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot heal or set well according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset the broken bone with large splints that will realign the limb together, so long as it reinforces itself as it was before; and yet do not completely immobilize its work. For this reason, you must nourish them with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are varied in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go across, and others that occur obliquely, just like the cuts of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each kind has its own method and proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings to its place; and fractures of the bone are known by the deformity of the limb, and are clearly seen by palpation and by pressing with the hand; and when there is no deformity, no crack, or great pain upon touch, there may be no fracture; but it can well have a deformity, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move it by hand, but place medicines that follow here, and then hold it delicately now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that goes in the limb, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now put them together equally, as abscesses come to life; and if abscesses filled with pus come, then let it rest one day, until the abscesses are appeased; then set them equally upon the skin where you can loosely and safely place them, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold them as follows hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, you must set them in two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or by your own hand if it is a small limb, or by two strings, or one string and by your own hand; and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are displaced, you must reduce them by all means at their proper places upon the skin where you can, and guard that through your work no injury or pain come to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems not quite right: dress it beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly, nor press it as those who bring about hot abscess and contraction to the limb through their work, as we have often wished.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at point, chastise well the patient that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor in turning, nor any other way; and watch well that the limb be so secure that he feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at point, and he must be put in such a condition that he feels no pain; and take care that he be placed straightly, so that there is no tortuosity when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are varied in smallness and largeness and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For small limbs, such as arms and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloth; and for large ones, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and firm bandage, because the wide bandages encircle the entire large limb evenly, leaving no gaps; then tie them tightly around three or four times according to the limb, and slightly tighten your hand on each bandage, then go above the break and tighten it less, so that the break can be moved a bit away from the break; and soften the bandage little by little until you feel a large part of the healthy tissue, then take the other bandage, and wrap around again over the broken area; then return to the part below the break, and tighten moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first lesson above; then place soft cloths between the tied linen or cloth strips, making sure they are all equal; finally, secure everything with a bandage from above, and put on your well-made pads if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something that soothes the abscess and reduces swelling, and leave it for several days; then extract with your fingers, which should be half as wide as a large cane root cut lengthwise, or from wood used to make splints, or from palm ribs, and they should be of this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it must be that the fingers which are placed on the wound are somewhat larger and broader than the others; and should be as long as necessary for the size or length of the limb. Then hold the fingers as you did at the first moment, then tie a suitable thread above, just as at the first moment over the break. The threads must be of moderate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of soft flax. For if the threads are too thick, like those made by the women who make their loops from twisted linen cords, it is a great error, for the thread cannot be equal if it is too fine. And it does not matter that there is less than two fingers' width between each finger.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of arrows after being tightly bound in their sound limbs, place over them lint or bandages of wool, so that it does not swell.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is inflicted by a sword, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to bind tightly with arrows all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to bind them tightly with arrows at first; rather, do this after 5 days or 7, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess following. And here is the method for ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that is kept on the walls of the mill, mix it with abundant egg, and apply this mixture not too thin nor too thick. This is the common method of the restoring plaster for many conditions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another plaster to restore fracture and dislocation and twisting: take 3 parts of iron rust, 3 parts of linen wick ash, 3 parts of myrrh, 5 parts of gum arabic, 7 parts of musk; 10 parts of gum benzoin; grind them into a powder, mix with honey from an egg; if the man's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is well composed and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for twisting: take musk and violet leaf, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 9 parts; acanthus root, 6 parts; armenian bark, 10 parts, grind well, mix with water or honey from an egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another plaster for joints and the broken bones from their places, and soothes the pain coming, and the cut in the bone, and the breaking: take new wool, and the grease in oil cooked, and put on the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good to soothe hot abscesses, and properly remove the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another plaster to heal broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and henbane leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another plaster for the healing of bone fractures and to reduce the swelling of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of visvalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of fennel; from each one part. Grind them, and concoct with wine. If the limbs are heated, then mix the concoction with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes in the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of visvalve, and seed of flax, daisy root, chamomile root, and sanicle, and flowers of violets and chamomile; from each one part. Grind them, and concoct with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	And Hippocrates states in his book that one should not apply to the broken limb for restoring strength anything made of wax and oil or anything else more, and that it should be between too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one should apply to the broken limb things dried and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster for wounds and pain: take mithridate and horse hair, or bird feathers, and vinegar, and salt, and grind them together, and make a plaster from them.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor do the bones move from their place; if no pain comes, do not remove it by hand. If pain comes to the area, or itching, with restlessness or swelling, hasten, and remove it, and take off the plaster now. Take a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, and soak it in water, and lift the limb until the itching ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, after which put on dry linen soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly enough until you are sure of the warm abscess; and reduce inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the fine suturing and a little plaster, but do not restrain it as tightly as before; and proceed with subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is dry and redness and pain and swelling have been removed from all parts, and you need to apply plaster and bandage, then restart it as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if none of what we have said comes to the member, and it is not dislocated after three or four or five or seven days; and at one time let it remain for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the broken parts are healed, and bring the adjustment near the flesh above; then restrain it more than first, and let it grow its meat, as I said before; and if you see that the place dries more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; apply hot water compresses each third day, and lessen the constriction slightly; by this work therefore cuts the nourishment to the member, and mend quickly what the foolish menders leave deformed: it is bad, and such works are fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of breaking are, and various figures, and the causes are destined; for there are breaks made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck fractures all the bone just beneath the skin, as done by axe or club; and because of this, this manner of breaking is called "axiure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this manner of breaking is called "absolute"; it includes wounds from these two breaks, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a compressed percussion, or fracture, or of stone necks, or falling on stone, or other similar cases.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture near the skin which is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as finely as hair, and is a small crack, and because of this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, causes a piece of bone to enter from below, and the swelling of the veins as blacksmiths do when striking on cauldrons; so that the bones are inside the wound.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or have had moist bones, such as a child's bone; and it happens in all these kinds of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like splinters; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all manner of fractures through their displacement, and by probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is there.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the fracture is known when one discovers the bone and rubs over it, then the black break becomes apparent.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, beware of the bad symptoms in the patient, and if you see any evil symptoms such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, paralysis, hot flushes, and the eyes turning red and inflamed, and other similar things due to various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractures come first to you, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone is corrupted, and the accidents as we have said come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes just to the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in such a way: and you must take note of the head where the patient was injured, and uncover over the bone in all ways you can, and more especially over the shape of the wound. And if blood flows from uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, aid as necessary, and it is that you fill the area with moistened linen soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are pacified, and you are assured of no further flow of blood; then begin under the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut precisely in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then one cuts a larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron. And work lightly, so you do not burn the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, you must pierce it from within, so that you make incisions with trephines but not completely through the bone beyond the skull. It should have a margin or circle above the point, preventing the point from passing beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to its place in the thickness of the bone, ensuring you have trephines for all skulls. This is the form of the three types of trephines:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities to pierce through the broken bone are that you place the needle on the bone, and turn it twice as much as you know the bone is pierced; then remove the needle a little bit further elsewhere, and do this throughout, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have such as forceps, pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and drawn the bone, it is necessary that you reset the alignment which has remained between the bone and all other similar instruments, but it must be more tense and finer than the other incisors; and if there remains any small bones or no scales, you should carefully remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with powders and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galien said, who spoke much on it and his words are these.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone, at the place or where the break is open and moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this incisor a lens-like object, the form of which is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and let the broken part be in two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently chip the bone all around, and take great care of the membrane beneath; if it is rough against the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed very harmfully and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce up to the membrane, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces, then you must scrape beyond that roughness and remove scales with a sharp razor of various quantities, to apply what is most suitable in each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use larger razors first and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other small incisions and fine fractures, you must apply what is most suitable according to its nature; and this is a matter that is not within the realm of one who has devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the eye is uncovered, it must be that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and in oil of rosemary, and place it over the wound; then take another doubled cloth two or three times, and in wine and oil of rosemary, and place it over the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the eye, then apply a bandage over the other, and do not tighten it too much that it hurts the wound alone; and leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscesses have calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of almonds, incense powder, arsenic, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it over the wound, and apply further medications that do not cause irritation; and guard that the wound is properly cleaned, so you neither leave the ointment out nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the linen of the forehead, it will run and harm, and bring great mischief to the patient; for when one applies something irritating over the eye, it does not heal from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if only blackness comes from what we have put on for the medicine to have its virtue, it is fitting that you take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one part of gum, and mix them; then apply this mixture in the manner of bandages until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts above the neck are broken, or only one of them alone, for these are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break nor cause pain or distortion, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must fix your little finger or thumb from the newborn, and set that break equally within your index finger, and at its base, so that the thumb regains its natural figure; and do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the thumb and cannot reach its place, you must set it equally at the top of a finger somewhat large.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, do the same for the other part, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can; otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are subsided, then place tents of linen thread at the top of the thumb where the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If there is a break on the other side, and the cracks are so large that they fill the pores of the birth.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And any restorer will say that one should moisturize the cracks with butter and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem right to me, but it is better to moisturize them with a preparation of egg white and flour; then leave the crack until the bone is hard and the cartilage tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one uses quill pens of goose instead of cracks, and then covers the wound with gauze, and if the break is severe, blows on it to help heal. Do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if boils come up on the nose as you work, put a dressing or moist cotton in rose oil, or in a little vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no boils come up on the nose, apply an ointment externally of silk flour and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk. Then cover with light stoppoks and do not bind the nose tightly. And if the break in the nose is small and broken into small pieces, extract using suitable instruments, close the wound, and treat things related to flesh and suturing, as appropriate ointments and applications; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat with dressings, and insert pledgets of lint until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound open, and the break is only split open, not broken into pieces but more like beams inside, one can recognize this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is in the right part of the jaw, you should place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left mandible, you should place your right index finger over the break lightly and fix it with the other hand by pressing from outside.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is separated into two parts, you should administer an extension to both parts, making them equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw a compress, and place over it a double bandage; and place over the bandage a well-made pad, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it around the mouth as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, release it on the third day, and then set what has changed back in place; and apply a poultice with flour of wheat mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour after you have removed the compress; and place over the poultice a light cloth, and if the poultice dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscessed arrow comes, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, note whether any piece of the bone has been removed; so subtle that it can be extracted with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flambes according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, close the wound if it is large, and apply suitable poultices over it to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the forcele
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forcele breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three manners: or it is broken and separated into two parts, and has fragments, and is the lightest to reset; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is when the break is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one feels the shoulder where the forcele is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then set equal the break to your two hands, so that the form be as it should, and there be no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place over the shoulder on the patient a round pad of cloth or wool, and make it as large as your necessity requires; then stretch and lift the forcele, and hold the pad with your hand, so that you can set the break equal, as it should.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder downward, because it comes from the bottom, then it is necessary for the patient to lie often on his side, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and have the attendants support the shoulder downward, until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it broken, then cut through it; and draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means, place this instrument on one of your incisors; but put this tool under the shoulder to guard against spillage.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not fixed, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two heads, as you see, and one should be broad, and the other narrow, just like the split in the wound that you made when you drew the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, drain the wound, and if the split is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess has come to head, I wrap it in rose oil and vinegar, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The setting of the bone, when it is in wounds and after surgery, is that you apply a plaster of flour and egg powder to the bone, then cover it with light bandages. Place a sphere under the bandage if needed; then take a very large bandage about a palm wide, place the cloth double over the bandages and the plaster, and wrap it around. Take a thin strip about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang out; place this strip on the broken area, then wrap the bandage up to the neck, under the sphere, and over the healthy part, and the affected part; secure each part well. When you see that the ligaments hold the broken bone properly, and clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, then change it daily. When the ligaments loosen, remove the restraint. Have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the sphere to lift the support up; this will alleviate the strain on the neck by supporting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, not removing it until any bad accidents occur, for about twenty days. Then reapply the plaster if needed, and keep it tightened until fully restored; it is usually restored within twenty-eight days, but faster in some cases.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	that often happens when the shoulder breaks or is dislocated at the head or mid-length, and cannot be moved without physical touch; arrange the parts according to the figure of the break, and reset them according to their natural form in all ways you can; then place on the head powder from a mill with abundant egg, wrapped lightly, and put over a double flag; then put on a large, thin strap slightly wider than the shoulder, ensuring no movement at any part of the shoulder, so use linen stuffing if needed to ensure even coverage; and then tightly wrap it with a broad bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and check the stitches each day; whenever it loosens, re-wrap it, and adjust the strap if it shifts out of place, and let the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder will be healed in twenty to twenty-five days. And when these numbers are completed, release it, for you should be certain, as bone does not mend lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone tends forward and out from the heart, incise and extract it, and do what we have said in the breaking of the strong ligament to calm the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends outward, and the patient feels great pain, as well as swelling. At once, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movement of the broken bones becomes apparent, and everyone can see this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies mostly on their back, and they place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and join the ribs at your hands, placing them evenly in all ways you can until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply plasters and ointments over the thin salt substrate or some other light material, and wrap them in a cloth, securing them on the broken bone so they do not move. Turn the bandage roundly on the back, pressing it appropriately, and rewound every hour. If it begins to loosen, tighten it; if it needs to be removed for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, pain, or abscess, act quickly, remove it, and treat what has come as in wound care methods; then reapply the plaster and keep it tight until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaking of the ribs comes from force only behind the body and on the inner head, and they bend due to being slippery; one feels this well during examination along the sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the resetting is that you align the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is inclining inward, the patient feels great pain and puncture, like from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; they groan in agony and immediately vomit much blood, which is a severe health issue. The ancients used great skill to treat this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to give foods that swell the belly to counteract the burning.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make such incisions in abscesses where no pus has come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if pus has come, then drain it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that we should put cups on the shoulder to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the cups will draw the superfluities to the shoulder due to the weakness of the disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that we should cover the shoulder with wet wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the heat even throughout, then it should be treated with the pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the bone where the cloth does not reach, and there is doubt for the patient, it is necessary to incise over the side of the fractured rib, and one must place something under the instrument to guard against wind; then one must cut the bone, and extract lightly, and then suture the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat the cure with plasters until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses continue, place moist cloths in rose oil, and apply them to the wound; and treat continuously the wound as needed for the abscess, and let it lie well placed under the rib where it belongs until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and likewise with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, if you see his hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many respects, and if they move and feel well when you hold and prick them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will recover if proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, if you see that the patches are softened, and if the accidents in the hands, and on the back due to wind and involuntary evacuation; and when it is soved over his abdomen, there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is inflamed on its back and it wants to abscess, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is fatal: do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, it is the thing less severe.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply it if there is a hot abscess, placing an olive oil or egg yolk oil spine on it until it subsides. Then place one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage. Instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone cracks, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth; then remove the bone, and join the two edges of the wound, if large, with stitches. Bind it with an ointment that promotes healing until it is healed. And if the bone head is broken, which is called the "shoulder bone," you should hold your left hand pocket equally with your right hand as much as possible, then place the plaster and bandage on it if needed; bind it tightly. If there is a cracked bone, cut it out, remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often it happens that the bone of the hip is fractured, and if it is so, there may be a slight alleviation in the head; make long, and incline to the back, and brings pain to the place, swelling, and discoloration at what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as high as you are over the fractured area; and recognize which are the fractures and their shape. And if the fracture is only in the head, place it evenly with the fracture, so that it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inward, make the patient lie on their stomach so that the restoration of the fracture aligns with you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, put on the plaster, then put a stick or a cork stake above, and hold the splint so that it does not move; and fill the space beneath the ribs, so that the joints are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses form and come to a head, do not touch them until the abscesses are pacified, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and hold as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjuncts are those between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, you must restore them according to one of the two methods: of which one is that you take a stick filled with moistened linen, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two heads with threads, and tighten them upwards, placing the patient's broken shoulder on the stick; then place his arm on the stick so it reaches the armpit, with a wooden brace in the middle, then elevate some heavy thing or have the attendants extend it downwards; then place the broken part level with your hands together, so that the broken part returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you support the patient on his pillow, and bind his hand to his neck. Then command two attendants such that one holds the part above the break in your hands, and the other holds it below. Each should extend their hold to their respective parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction be stronger, hold fast beneath the breaker, and above the breaker, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the breaker is near the head of the shoulder, it is fitting that you place the bandage midway beneath the axilla, and the other towards the knife, beneath the breaker; and likewise if the breaker is opposite the knife, you must place the bandage lightly, without labor, so that the breaker remains even both above the bone and above the knife; then set the break properly as it should be, and hold it, if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not hold it fast for seven days, and place above moistened wool in asepsis and rose oil until the abscesses are appeased; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you apply the plaster beneath the breaker, then assemble the arm on the shoulder or on the breast, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, holding above the shoulder support and above the arm, so that the arm remains in a neutral position, unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stays, and place a wider and stronger stay over the break, with two fingers' breadth between each stay, and let each stay be so large as to pass the break three fingers' breadth on each side; then apply pressure on the stays as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, more forcefully but not by drawing apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of the stays and the compression, as we have said, during the hour you set the broken limb, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, let it remain free for seven days, as we have said; then examine each three days the wound, to ensure there is no itching or swelling at the site, or that new growths do not appear in the limb because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the treatment, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents happen, do not dislocate again for three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach. Place over the shoulder a cushion filled evenly with wool, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the figure of the broken limb does not move or become softened. The treatment will come by virtue of medicine, and it will give the flesh as we have placed before, in such a manner that the flesh be at first fine and delicate; and when it begins to recover, make it thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is custom that the shoulder and the limb should be reset for forty days from then on; and then one must dislocate again, giving baths and ointment medications to treat properly.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and bound up, it must remain to untie for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fascicle," of which one is small and lies next to the pouch; and the other is large, lying below, toward the smaller bone. By chance, it may be broken only the large fascicle, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fascicle is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing is good. And when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and more severe than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small fragile bone that is broken merely, then it should be extended lightly and placed evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, then it should be held more firmly; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others. Let the patient cross his limbs over themselves, and the cushion in front higher so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the attendants' arms below their hands or at the elbow, and another attendant above the other part.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the parts evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its place. And if there is any detached part that cannot be grasped and restored to its place, then cut it out, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the cauterizer for wounds, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, make a poultice with rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the poultice tightly, so that the abscesses are alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the poultice, and apply the plaster of the flour with abundant egg. Then place the strips, and let the strip of the cauterizer be more firm and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six strips or arms in various positions: whether the cauterizer is in one of the bones, or two; and apply more tightly over the cauterizer than elsewhere, and less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the poultices above the cauterizer be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the threads from which they are made be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any harmful accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must rinse the member with hot water until the itching is alleviated; and let the member rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and it seems so, then address accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you observe that the swelling cannot come to the member, because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and leave it for a few days, until the swelling subsides, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen the dislocation for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or in between, then place his hands on his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and near the knuckles, there are few breaks, but many times it results in swelling.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it must be set crooked, and straight before him evenly; then place his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the broken bones, and set the joints equal until they are well jointed; and apply the plaster and stoppers if abscesses do not come, then put a bandage according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in one linen towel.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the bone of the sole between the toes, make a pad of cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken sole; then bind it with a long cloth, and let the bandage be as large as the sole of the hand, and bind it properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the wrist, you must place one splint on top and another beneath in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of our fingers, if it is displaced, set it straight as it should; and bind it with the palm, and if you see, place a small straight splint to lift the break, and let it not move; and if the break is at other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or bind them all together, keeping them from moving, or place a splint above, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back; and the restoration is to ligature above the break and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their back, then each minister extends their ligature to their respective part equally; and this is when the break is placed on the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one ligature against the knife, and the other ligature below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then place the ligatures behind the knee, and the extension downward; then set the bone equal with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and the ligature, unless abscesses occur.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down first then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the injured area with a double-layered bandage in two or three layers, and let the excess hang down. Then turn the leg until the heels are at the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, underneath from below the knee, and follow the end of the thread upwards; then wrap the bandage around the leg and the thigh, placing a pad over the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to ensure even pressure. Begin ligating in three or four turns around the injured area; as you go further from the injury, the tighter it should be. Then tighten the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, securing three pads above, and follow back down over the top of the thread until you reach the foot. Ensure the tightness so that it does not move in place, then leave it as is, ensuring no abscess forms or swelling occurs elsewhere.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, dislocate it and adjust what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it must be washed if one can; and if one cannot, it must cut the flesh, and draw out the force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And none the less, if the thigh is broken when we place strips on it, as in the shoulder and arm; nonetheless, in the restoration done, the patient does not suffer.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in seven days, or somewhat fewer or somewhat more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groin of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is not more than a crack or hole, and happens in all wounds, and perceived wounds, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one should put equal flesh on its ends until it is assembled and moves as one can; then apply the plaster, and place a round pledget if you need it, and bind it as it ought to be. Then renew all the arrangements that we have said for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar; and apply to each accident what it needs until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	In the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and fractures occur in all parts just as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equally the same as that of the arm, and the operations are exactly the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg twists in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the finer bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and it turns outward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and bind the straps equally; but still, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, the extension should be less and more gentle; and adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two bands of woven wood that fit the leg from side to side, and be long from the leg below the knee down; then wrap in two layers one bandage over and under, and tie in the middle thus, and at this place the leg cannot decline to right nor to left, and so it is well; and no one administers a band of long wood, and it is of wood, and one places the leg for warding off movement, and properly done is this in the break or where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or another accident; so cure until it be healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	A the foot there is no breakage, but in the bone of the foot there is sometimes breakage and in the toes, and there is no force other than a wound in many dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breakage in the bone of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping one another, place the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to walk, and then place your foot over its foot where the bones are raised, pressing until they return to their proper places; then apply the plaster and poultice, and put a small board with two heads under the sole of the foot, then bandage the foot appropriately, and wrap it tightly with cloths and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the two bones of the hand; then put on each broken finger a splint according to its length, and let it be slightly wider, then place under the palm that which I have said, and hold it properly; and if there are II or III, or more, broken, put on each finger one splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and place the palm under the foot; and let it cover well the top of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said to other breakers, as we have said; and assist each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breakage of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's natural birthplace is broken, make it sit enlarged, then incline it to the part of the back, and hold it from behind; fill the cavity of nature with cotton for the patient, and put in one as big as she is; then remove the woman, and raise the back little by little, and thus the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of nature, and the bone will return with her size; and when she wishes to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so: the break will be restored. If you see, take a bladder of birch, tie a cane to its opening, and fill the whole bladder inside; nature will return the break; then fill it with cotton and leave it that way for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken in the man or woman, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use to it, and attends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fractures signify in many dispositions the right way of restoration: understand them accordingly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose's wing and insert the thigh into it; then wrap it tightly with bandages around, and let it be for three days or longer, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For he who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, must be treated for the wound now, as our remedies attest.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, dress it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then resume treating the wound at that same hour or on that same day, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess forms, continue the treatment until a new day, as long as the abscess is subsiding. Do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for doing so would bring about adverse effects.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the open chest, you must set it gently with your hands, using a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if you do not have an extension to make equal with your hands, use a tool made of iron, which has seven or eight prongs, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this purpose, you need a screw that can hold three or four, depending on what it needs for each treatment of a broken bone; let it be round and slightly thick, so it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp in front, and thick in the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," which means that the curved heads must be placed on the top of the visible bone; and let it be hammered once, so that it returns, and may be even one against another.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument has the strength to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, with a suitable instrument cut, such as a lancet or knife, to your ability; then leave what remains in the bone due to hardness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it is in its place, then moisten I with wine of black stiptic and properly if it was sooted; and do not put anything over the wound like a crust or anything that might cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer sesilium when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not restrained with the breakage; and often foolish people have done this and caused the patient to die or become corrupted at least once; and let the bindings be softer and more yielding than other bandages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you suspect that bad accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, it is not fitting to put on sesilium; but envelop all around, in place of sesilium, wrap with hard bandages, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days swelling in the wound, remove what you have put on for wine, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetropharmakon ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should release the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be aligned in such a manner that the swelling flows down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the swelling does not subside, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you should clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the head, or any other kind of corruption, it must be treated according to what he states in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open in the same limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and others similar to the large limbs, do not treat it immediately, for often death comes from this. Rather, let it remain until it rots; perhaps it will fall out by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it as it is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the blisters that come over the seam
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Blisters often come after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sight to behold how the limb is disfigured; perhaps it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, when the boil is fresh: administer styptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and other similar substances, so that you take any of these things or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine or with an abundance of egg or with basil; apply them to the lump in vials, bind well, and do not unbind in hand for several days; then release, and begin another, until the lumps are removed; or you may bind over a well-prepared piece of lint; for the properties of lint so that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the lump has already turned to hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cover with a plaster, and cut away the excess; or you will have it shaved until removed, and cure until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored and the limb remains weak and delicate after, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, preventing proper nourishment to the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or from too great movements, not at their proper time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it remains weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and cause the body to grow tender, until the flesh multiplies within him; and give him baths, and give him joy and pleasure; then apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment attracts the great nourishment, and frequently wash the wound with warm water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after recovery, and the broken bones are exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, all in all, it does not lose its natural work: one should not believe those fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many such fools have done this in our land; these works are blamed, and great harms come from them, even possibly death; altogether, if the swelling and torture are fresh, they should be treated with hot water, or cooked herbs that soften, as leaves of vismarvel, roots, hyssop, and similar things; then apply a softening plaster, as well-made diacrylon; and take the muscilage of vismarvel, and mix it with lard or olive oil, and apply it on top; or take fatty figs, and grind them with colon flour, and other medicines that quickly alleviate.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodes are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And the member should be moved each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut up to the bone with a sharp incisor gently; and great care and skill are needed in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to any, it must now be brought back without rubbing.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the eyes will swell, and by chance one might reset them with pins; for this, it must not be that one moves them when they are swollen: many times it brings on spasm and other pains; nonetheless, when this happens, let the patient be fomented with warm water and oil, then gently reset, and cure each member as it comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Often the jaws are dislocated sideways, and the dislocations of both sides occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their sockets and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging toward the ear, and drain saliva from the mouth so he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, wrapping his tongue with his speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it can return to place through several movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and thorough, you must reset it quickly, without delaying; and in such a manner that the attendant holds the patient's head, and places a moist cloth from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation affects two parts; and the other hand should support them, to keep them equal. Instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And place the joint equally, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the bringing together is gripped, even if it is the two mandibles together, soak them in hot water and oil, and gently reset them; nor fret much about resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought together equally, and the patient's mouth closes well, soften it by applying moistened cloth wrapped in a paste made of rose oil and wax. Then lightly bind it with soft threads. Let the patient sleep on his back, and place his head between two cushions so that it does not move left or right, nor strain to chew. Instead, give him light food until the pain is relieved, and secure the mandibles; then allow him to eat and drink lightly as he wishes, without forcing his mouth open for eating and drinking, until the mandible is well secured and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour and are not yet returned to their sockets, then fevers and stiffness become habitual, and by chance, there may be a dislocation of the abdomen, or vomiting of black bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is fatal; many times those who suffer from it die within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the lever
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The lever cannot dislocate the lower part of the sternum inside its continuity and the tip, and is only dislocated once at the end, and one can feel this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; then press the lever firmly to your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place. The head which is opposite the knife cannot be dislocated; if slightly, and if it is dislocated once, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; thus, the heads of the shoulder are brought back when they are removed from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is dislocated in three manners: one is when it dislocates at the bottom of the socket; and the second is at the base of the arm; and by chance it dislocates at the top, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates from bottom to top, especially in those with little flesh, as it springs quickly in them; in those with enough flesh, it sprouts by degrees, and returns by degrees.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men through impact or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It must therefore be tested until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when they slide towards the armpit, and you place a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a depression at the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit at the back of the shoulder head, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose nor move with any movements; and similarly, if it is displaced upwards, it is not hidden, for you clearly find it at the back of the shoulder; and this manner of dislocation is not easily reducible when it is new or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient upwards, then places his palms under the shoulder, and restores the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister lifts his hand and extends it upwards, putting it there; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said with the hands after a few days, it must be that the patient is bathed in warm water; and the administrator applies gently soothing treatments, such as decoctions of althea, fenugreek, and marigold in water, and applies them; then the patient should be fomented on their back, and a pad of equal thickness of wool neither too soft nor too hard placed under the shoulder. Place the patient's foot on the pad, and lift the shoulder blade virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient upward toward the chest; and another minister ties the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; this shoulder will now return to its place, and if you wish to reset it in this manner: then have a person larger than the patient present; and stand facing the patient's side, and place the shoulder under the arm of the patient, lift the arm upward, so that the patient hangs by the hand; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, place something heavy on him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the dislocation is also reset in another manner: and it is done by sticking a long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be as round as a pike, neither too large nor too small; then place it under the patient, but ensure his hand has a cloth wrapped around it to prevent burning; and let the patient's arm hang down on the other side properly. The joint will return to its proper place quickly. And if it does not return despite all these things we have said, perform this treatment: take a poker two inches thick and four feet long, which should have a round head to fit perfectly under the armpit, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie above the head of the stake under, so that the stake does not bruise the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and stretch out your arm above the long stake, and tie the auxiliary above the stake, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a ladder rung of a wide ladder, and let the hands hang downwards, and leave the body hanging from another part: the joint will now restore itself.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is on, in whatever manner that may be, you must put under the armpit a pad of even wool, then apply the plaster prepared with powder of mill, along with incense and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the pad under the armpit accordingly, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then he may eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is set and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, you must apply three puncture cauteries as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it comes loose after 7 days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint was never set in its proper place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations of the hip and breasts, or behind, are caused by impact and stretching of hands; and they are treated until they heal.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there are weaknesses in the limb, and delays due to movement, the patient should take baths many times until that weakness is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and if it is dislocated in all directions, especially in front and behind, the dislocation is not replied to, for one can see it clearly and feel it clearly; and it remains dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick part with the healthy one, you must see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And the joint is frozen, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it in the same way that abscesses break and heal, for if abscesses break and heal, it would be grievous to bring them back; and by chance they cannot be fully reset, especially when it is advanced; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset in this way, you extend its hand with both of your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands should align according to the cut around, above, and below, and guide the joint back to its place as much as possible, or to the root of its palm.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forward, it returns when he doubles his hand to his face and fixes the root of the palm with the knife which is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it will not return to place, administer strong extension; and two attendants extend the arm, and each holds the other by the hand, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm in all directions, then wrap it in a double long and wide cloth; and when the attendant joins the joint to the hand, apply an ointment with egg white to soften the joint, then form the joint properly until it returns; and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with beaten egg, hold the arm at the side of the patient, and let it for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly set in its place, loosen the ligament and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, reapply the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels painful after the setting of the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub it beautifully, pressing until it is alleviated; or you may place on the joint a fat sheep tallow, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and apply water; when it sweats, thoroughly rub the joint, then put the tallow back on, and then apply water again; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, place hot moist sheep dung heated with butter, and strain it over; it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand becomes swollen, and the return is light, more so than other joints. Therefore, it must be reset quickly to its place as soon as it becomes dislocated, just as the arm becomes swollen, or an abscess forms hotly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is as follows: you place the injured hand on a table, extend the fingers of the helper's hand, and position your hand so that its palm aligns with the joint. Keep it until it returns to its proper place. You must ensure it is correctly set; then, place the back of the patient's hand on the table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the caregiver place their hand on that joint area.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well. If not, apply a plaster to treat the abscess and let it remain in this state until it begins to heal.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain twisted; and this does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve is cut or the artery. In such a case, there is only one way to relieve it, by using a fire cautery near the injury, and perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then loosen it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, apply warm watery gel and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, sometimes on the back of the palm or the palm's belly; then set the finger, and hold the dislocation with your fingers until it returns. Then support the end of the finger, and push it toward the part where it is disjointed; and let it be 2 days, and then place it in equal position for that day; do not tie it, as we have said, and loosen it each day, and allow it to move, then re-tie it daily; do this often until it is close, and do the same if they are dislocated on the palm's belly, and do so as you did before until it heals; do the same when they are dislocated in another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no point in treating it, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur without voluntary control, and they cannot hold them. Many times, parts of the body become soft, or both thighs or both arms. And many times, the spine changes in four parts; that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez": the treatment is that you reward if gilbositez came from childhood; there is no cure nor healing for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say it has no real benefit in all cases; but I have summarized it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit that comes before the buttocks, there is no health; and also that which comes directly into two sides, and one cannot cure it except by the proper place that comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be extended on his side in a single even position, and have an extension beneath him, so he does not freeze; then stick one coal at the head into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two coals; and let them be well fastened, the coals as we have said, and the minister put his palms on the spine firmly until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this cure, take a board of three fingers' width, and wedge it under the wall, and if the patient is on their side, place the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board over the spine; and have the patient's feet placed on the other end of the board, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, do this at the wheel that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you insert two hot coals into the head of the patient's arm from one side, and place two others under the feet, with a palm-width of long spices between each pair of coals; in each coal, place an ember or where the wheel runs, and ensure the coals are firmly placed in the ground so they do not move. Between each pair of coals, place a turning coal on which the limb turns, and place two small coals of palm-width length for the wheel to turn. Then tie the string among the axles to the wheel near the head, and the other string to the other wheel near the feet. Each attendant turns their wheel with the string, and the master keeps the spine level as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are equal, apply a dessiccatif plaster with abundant egg, and then plug it, and then place a strip of three long fingers under the table to drain the yellow part and the healthy spinal section, bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient rest until he is healed; and if anything comes at the end of the healing, it must be administered soothing medicines with the strip that we have said before; and sometimes one gives a piece of flax, and sometimes there appears an appearance in the rear spinal column of the back, and one should consider that this is dislocation; and it is the bone that shows, for which one must not have presumption: by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations, not in the same way as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: internally and externally, in front and behind; more internally it is more so, less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of an internal dislocation is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the injured knee is more exposed than the healthy one. The injured knee cannot bend as far as the healthy one; this is due to the swelling of the thigh muscle caused by an abscess.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that his leg is well according to completion; nevertheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot do so, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this case of dislocation is that you should wait if the dislocation is old, and it remains in its position, then there is no need for any further treatment; and it is not fitting for it to have any expectation.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for that which the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you should hasten to reset the joint, stretching it inside and outside, and moving it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to place, and has no need of further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or at the point where it is tied above the knee; and another assistant extend his hand over in such a way that he places his hands under the patient's armpits, then tie a rope around the thigh; and another holds the head of the rope; and stretch both upwards and downwards at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and hangs there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for the four similitudes, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not so, it is necessary to treat it according to its similitude. If the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, you must support the patient on his healthy side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh and under the angle, then position the ligature above the angle and towards the backbone; then have another attendant lift the patient's arm and grasp the thick part of the injured thigh, extending it fully upward: it will now return to its place. This method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in the manner we have said, it is necessary to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong ligature around their heels and knees, and let the injured leg be extended about two feet more than the other. Then hang it from the top of a stake, and extend its arms long on the ground. Then command one attendant to grasp the top of the thigh, and have another attendant hanging with the patient who firmly grasps the thigh, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are in front, the patient lies down as we have said in that concerning flexibility, and draw a line up the bad leg properly, and on the foot also; then place two sticks, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert the stick between the thighs of the bad limb in the form; and plant moist cloths around, so it does not blister the bad limb, then extend each minister towards him, and the eyes place equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	And if it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	And if not, place it on the table and press it as we have said in the flexibility, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be stretched the bad leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the thumb on the painful side of the bad leg, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is on the side, it must not be stretched downward or lifted from the ground, but should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated to the side, as we have said regarding lying on the two hips; and place it under its fold, and stretch the ligament as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; it will be right when the patient extends his legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster and the bandage, so that the hips do not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then remove it, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, stretch it as before, and leave it for three days; then remove it, and let the hip go well, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee can be dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not sit at the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his thigh, and put his foot on yours; then take his knee with both palms, and pull between them, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and have other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that his leg sits lightly at the thigh; and apply the plaster, and heat the leg to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release the bindings; and do not allow the patient to work much until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not properly aligned, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is dislocated once, and fully reset both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and protrudes forward to the part where it was dislocated: the resetting is light, and one should gently stretch it with their hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, you must seat the patient upright, and hold them by the ministers outside at the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot toward yourself with your right hand, and twice with your left, then stretch it upwards, and firmly place the foot upward; do this twice as we have said, by pulling and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, reattempt the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the earth between their thighs, binding the stake with bandages tightly so as not to displace the patient; then hold the thigh by the ministers, and another minister stretch the foot at their hands or at the stake, tying it above the ankle; then stretch each minister equally, and the stake should remain between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when stretched; finally, place your fingers evenly at the dislocation and have another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is in place, put the plaster and stops on it, and strengthen the bandage, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, that the ligatures be not too tight; then let it remain for two or three days, and when the ligatures soften, so does the bandage; then loosen them on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he goes before this term is completed, it is not safety that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come about, you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them beautifully with effort, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back or hip bone, you must seat the patient on a firm surface or on a bench completely straight, and place his foot over what is revealed by these joints, then press firmly on his foot until it returns; and when it is equal, and nothing is revealed, then put a shoulder table under the sole of the foot, then extract it firmly, and let him rest for three days, then release him; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees hope for recovery: do not be presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not patient, merciful, and slow; nor too bold. At the beginning of things, use cooling remedies to pacify hot abscesses, and leave the patient under God's care if there is no hope of recovery; and when there is hope, immediately set the limb in place as the abscesses cool down. When the limb is in place, administer cooling remedies for abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be with ointments that dry out the area; and if with dislocation there are fractures or small broken bones, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard against entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will bring you misfortune according to your Creator, and for the wisdom that arms and protects you.
Amen	Amen
