O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine by assembling its filling, and have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is strongly rooted in our region and has been entirely excluded from everything, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients that their hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions have been closed, and the science has been neglected.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I should vivify the entire order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the cautery tools, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no skilled surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting that he who undertakes this master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of them, and their movements and veins moving and resting, and from where they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, Hippocrates said that nerves with non are much, and with work are little; and especially in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not aware of the things previously said, must take care lest he do anything in error and waste men's time; so that I have often wished more of those who undertake this science and abandon themselves to it without knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool who incised the abscess of scrofula or throat of a woman, and incised the arteries in her neck; because of this so much blood issued forth that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another fool who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treating the duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the sharp instrument made a wound; and the ignorant physicians fixed the break on the wound with splints by force, and left no part of the wound without salve, and let it be thus until the end; and ordered that he not loosen it at all; and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot rotted.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hurried to come and reset the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways when corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And take another blade which collapses the embedded abscess, and then inflame through the wickedness of its authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an abscess, when it is pure of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron if it is not in such a place where all the corrupted parts can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, skilled craftsman, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in multiple positions. And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you. If you take your weapons in jest, and undertake your sick lightly and firmly, and use the better way so by the grace of God you come to salvation and be joyful; and leave behind fearful diseases of grief; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in them that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take ill a sick person, that you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have dealt with this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cautery and cautery with medicine water, and they order the chapters from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they order the chapters and give the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from the head down to the feet, and give the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, since we remember the work, it must be that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid, and of the harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses; and about this many wise men spoke, and agreed upon it; and I find their words insufficient, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery aids universally in all complexions where there is matter; there are two complexions: namely, hot complexion due to matter, and dry complexion due to matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry complexion with matter, some debated and said that the fire cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be used to treat hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness; those who said the opposite claim that the fire cautery greatly helps with hot and dry diseases that affect the bodies of people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it so through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And moreover, do not interfere with it except that those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of the temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and their outcomes and duration; we fear nothing from other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the more they came together and agreed on the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery together with heat is of the secrets of wound treatment, and has greater goodness than a burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and affects only the part that is burned, and does not harm other parts to a great extent.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines affect one part from another by diffusion, and bring diseases to the affected part that hinder healing; and by chance, the patient might die due to the heat and the quality of its substance alone, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experiment and the long service and study I have devoted to the art, as it pertains to the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse the length of my words, for it pleases me not to deprive you of the secret concerning fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher states in demonstrating; receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, boy, when the cauteries ought to be made, and they have chosen times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is suitable in all times, because the evils arising come under the help of the cautery; and especially if the cauteries are for pains necessary and urgent that cannot wait until greater evil befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think so, dear boy, as the foolish people do; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no return. And they say thus: but it is not as they believe, because a cautery is only medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that cause pain, and it is worth more than other medicines for the speed of its power and the virtue of its work and rule.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes only once according to the patient's constitution and the location of the disease and its virtue; and in him are gathered the superfluities through the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauterizations administered at the site where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizations for teeth due to pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return at all; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And most people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations work after medicine, and their opinions are false, for when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the latest in medicine, not according to the intention of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with an instrument of gold is better than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the leeches do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, for I have proven it and found that it is so in some men; and cauterization with gold is better than iron, as they lauded.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot judge when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it should be cooled promptly; and if you heat it too much, you must cool it in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins should be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold in the head, and there are two of them, which we make because of a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for the multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purified by medicinal substances changing their nature for three or four days, according to what the virtue and strength and custom of the patient allow; and then remove the head from the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place it crooked between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of your feet; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two ends meet, let it bleed from both sides. Then heat the cautery called "olivare," and this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do this by lowering and drawing your hand little by little, turning it. Then withdraw your hand entirely, and raise the mark if you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. After that, take a little salt, and put in soft, moist cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and let it remain for three days. Afterwards, put a moist cloth with butter on it; leave it there until the scalding is gone. Then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, move it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And any of them said that the fire cautery should be applied so much that part of the bone is burned, and then the burned part of the bone should be removed and cleaned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another says that the fire cautery should be applied so much above, and pressed down so forcefully that it displaces bone as wide as the ring that women put in their noses, for this causes the humors to move out. One must keep the wound open long; after that, one should clean and suture.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of applying the fire cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except in some cases where there is a fear of death; and I believe that I should apply the milder one. For the shoulder joints are weakened by continuous natural drainage, as we testify in other limbs. And even when the patient's shoulders are weak naturally, and the first application of cautery appears more beneficial and moderating to me, from this practice I use what seems most salutary in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the head there is chronic pain that lasts long, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie," and treatments for cleansing the head and eyes and poultices; and if one applies the fire cautery as we have already said, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take note that the patient's head is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize over that area a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the head down to the bone as we said before, do the cautery on the side called "vasselz"; and this side is where one places suction cups; and move your hand lightly so that you do not go down to the bone: patients feel much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries for the horns should be finer than those used for the middle part of the head, and this is their form.
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there comes sudden pain in a part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by medicinal herbs, and other treatments for the diseases have been done as I said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help: then he makes cauteries according to two ways, that is to say with medicine ague and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with medicine ague is that you take a slice of alz, and remove the bark and rind just a little around the shoulder. Then place it in such a way on the temple where the pain is located that you can lay the slice of alz beneath the skin; and when it has been laid there, tie it well and leave it for twelve hours. Then untie it and apply a piece of garlic instead, and let the wound remain for two or three days; then place above a compress in butter until it is dry.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment until he is healed; and if you see, then do those of some burning medicines that I have written or tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery using coal; it has the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because its tip is made in the shape of a small cup or has little curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly move the iron lightly, so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and remove your hand so that the artery, which is above, does not burn, and let out plenty of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton in aid of the wound, and set over the head for three days; then place soft cotton with butter, and thereafter cure the head with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish cauterize this emigraine with the cautery called "cultellare", do so to the entire point, and beware of cutting the artery in this emigraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of emigraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure an emigraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cautery previously mentioned from medicine and from iron is not sufficient, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot; and thus apply over the painful area a line of half a digit's length, and withdraw your hand once, and strain so as not to cut the artery and not to come to the bone; and beware of the mandible that moves when one eats, and the nerves have regard only to the movement and that spasmodic action does not arise in the patient, and beware of the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially for those who do not know it, and are not studied and experienced; and leave the work half done; but I will tell you how one stops bleeding from the artery when it is cut, and I will show where it affirms in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the other.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and you have applied medicinal solutions and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then heat this cautery called "poins," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing all around the painful ear, or in both places where pain is felt, and then move slightly upwards from the root of the ear after having pierced its length; have ten points around each ear; afterwards cure the ear until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be cured by cauterization is not of those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterizations for symptoms that come from drying and wasting of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this symptom of torture that moves from phlegm in the fluids, purgings of bile, and gargling, and if that does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery over the top of the ear just below a little from the edge of the ear, and another on the temple as long as an inch; let the cautery remain there until the halves of the heart are burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the surgical case that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it should be that the knives are a bit larger; after treating the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and the patient does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one on the head, and one on the wound called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	For lithargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is fitting to give the patient large and pounded pills that purge the brain; after cleansing the head of the patient thoroughly, and placing on the occipital region a plaster of mustard as written or treated in the application of plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed thus, well and good; and if not, he should make three cauteries down from the head to the neck, with two fingers' breadth of space between each cautery; and cure as with others, and if you see fit, and the patient is suffering, he should make one cautery in the middle; and if needed, two more above the two horns, and cure until it is healed; and let the cauteries called "olivare," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of oils and as we have said before; then rub the head of the patient, afterwards make cauteries down from the head and above each horn, and one behind and three along the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries along the spine; and leave them until the deepest part is burned, then lift your hand; afterwards cure until it is healed, and let the cauteries be called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patients are great and suffer from gentle medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear the gargling, make him gargle and chew often with good meats; after placing the head in the middle, and I make him drink the cautery according to what we have said before, and on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers greatly, make cauterizations as I said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is injured, if he undergoes the fine cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is corrupt superfluities or thick phlegm, then the cautery with such cauteries as we have said for paralysis should be used.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink things by which his brain may be purified, according to those described earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After reducing the head of the patient; after making the linen torcular well made, as a circle, place it under the head; and let the patient lie crossed, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and use it with old rosemary butter; and heat it over fire tempered well, so that the cloth can be applied if he can bear it; after this, empty the torcular from within under the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with other good governance until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see to cauterize him, make pricks in several places throughout the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain more; and then put on damp cotton in butter and gelatin grease.
de l’awe des eulz	from the fear of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When fear comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and have the patient drink things that cleanse the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After this, instruct him to look behind his head, and cauterize through the head, and make two cauterizations on both temples if the descent of fear is in both eyes together, or in one eye if the descent is in one. And cover the entire cauterization with all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, making the cauterizations long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and during incisions how to apply the cautery or hot iron over the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the chest due to tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears in the eyes are old and accustomed and are over the veins, or out of the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic excess, then I apply the cautery as I said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes: I apply one cautery above the forehead, two cauteries above the temples, and two cauteries or hot irons over the two bones; and if there is more need, I cauterize bleedingly above the solar plexus with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	with the body of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and if it does not improve, then let the patient drink three noxious herbs; after that, lance the head, and make a fire cautery or in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries on the cautery called "clavilis" above the two sorcs, a little below the hairline; and beware not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to make two cauteries on the two sinews as long as the demons are; and leave not the hand aside that the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns white and pricks the eye, and in such cases cauteries are performed according to two methods: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards draw on paper a figure that is as large as the leaves of laurel, and make it the beginning of the sign beside the hairs; then put moist cotton in egg white and saffron powder over the eye, then heat the cautery as described above.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn a few times, that the scars are dry in their place; and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the size of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave thus for 3 days, afterwards put moist cotton in butter until the scalding is gone; after that treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when the hairs come after this, and the paper is softened, then resume the cautery on that same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are cut off, cauterize until the paper returns to its natural place and remains even, and do not prick the hairs near the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then take the form of the bay leaf from parchment; then take frankincense and quick charcoal, of each one li (a measure), and grind them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then apply on the form that you have made like the bay leaf, and put eyes on the paper. And if the disease is only in the eye, work only in I [eye], and if also in both; and put under the eye moist cotton in the white of an egg; and the patient's head be in your sound hand and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press the spot and the nose every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for they feel it as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the inflammation has passed, lift the head from awe, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put on the medicine again over the head or the medicine has not acted, as long as your actions are equal, and your eyes fixed; then place a wet cloth in oil until the sore is healed, after which cure the head of the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to watch your work well with great care so that it does not fail in the application of the medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft later, and the hairs prick in the eye, then resume the treatment on that part which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the wound heals completely; and this is the form of the leaf of the myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not always give the right way to him for whom this study of the art is an endeavor.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your sound shoulder; and have the ministers hold his head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or shift; afterwards, put moist cotton in the yolk of an egg or in persillion juice over the eye; after that, heat the cautery which is divided: and place it on the head as if it were shaped like a swallow's feather, together with where the cautery should be; if you see, so mark from one side to the other, and if you see, so make it also like a tent; but in any case, what is placed there must move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus and dry it out; and if it is closed, work on it, and draw out the bough; after that, place the hot cautery in the form of a feather, and keep your hand at the part above the eye where the cautery touches, so your hand does not do anything wrong; and put the cautery in the grease above the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, restart the cautery once more, and do so if you need to, and let it be for three days; after that, place moist cotton in butter, and continue the treatment with the ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass and it is not healed, apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed; then treat according to what he came to in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Hear about the fistula, and make it even; after that, place in the opening one thin slice of quince.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the quantity of one pennyweight; and hold your hand or arm firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, that the melted plombe does not run to its eye; and it is fitting that we place on the eye of the patient wet woolen cloth or sponge: the plombe thus heals the fistula and the healthy part through marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, it is fitting to administer pertusin to the neck, and bring the fistula back to the body of the neck according to what is proper in itself.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When the cure for these cracks, as we said in divisions, does not help, then heat the small fire cautery knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place it in the cracks until it is hot; afterwards, apply a plaster to the wound until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or to the eye socket, or to the palate, or to the roots of the teeth, after performing putrefaction and drilling and allowing it to mature and become a fistula; and if the cure as we said in divisions does not help: then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, plug or puncture the fistula, and keep your hand there until the iron reaches the bottom of it and behind it; and do this one or two times after the cure as we said in treatments until it heals. And if it is cured this way, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the wound and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	by movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines but it is not effective, then put the patient's chief in your healthy one; afterwards, heat the cautery as described in the form that follows, in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and insert the heated cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it remain for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must be treated with two methods of cautery: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Fire cautery with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it in a iron or tin spoon; then take cotton and wrap it at the tip of a tent, and the moist butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see soft wool and cotton in cool butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron until the fire comes to the nerve of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery made of fire is such that you take one of iron or of steel, and let it be large so that the flame does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, as its form will follow hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed on that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of applying the cautery, and then quickly apply it; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whichever part you will, and according to what you have power to do; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is due to phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with coals from which smoke arises. Let it have two openings for the smoke to escape on the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice where needed, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days; then cover with a moist cloth in butter until the burning sensation is gone; after that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated first with solvent medicines; after which apply a fire cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After which apply another fire cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cauteries called "clavile" be as shown in the form we have presented before; and cure it as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cauterization
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the body are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or drying, and the illness is old, then apply two fire cauteries on the flank at their sides; and another cautery between the breasts; and let the cauteries called "clavile" be as shown in the form we have previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make the fire cautery at pricking all the points called "poins" of which the form was given earlier in the illness of the ears; and let the points be until about XXX, or nearly.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment of the shoulder as previously mentioned, let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, since you make three of them together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After you have cleaned the patient's back and sides; next, gently press with your left hand on the heart located at the ribs; and if the dislocation is within, heat the fire cautery which has two nooses of the form it should be:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the sides, and bring together the form of the cautery into four cauteries; and for this purpose, a cautery with three nooses is made, because the forms of the cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nooses.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And once adjusted above this first nerve, because of which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Place the fire cautery with powdered pomegranate seeds and salt; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, little happens, then apply the fire cautery on the thick part of the joint, or several cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, thus healing the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach because it is contrary to his constitution, and the catarrh multiplies in him, and methods of treatment are accustomed but do not benefit him, then the patient should be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I will make three cautery marks above the heel with the quantity of a bean, for each cautery claw-like, and two cauteries beneath the two flanks so that the figure of the cauteries be at three angles, and have space between them so that they do not stick together when decay sets in; and let the cautery be so perfect that it penetrates both sides of the heel, and let the figure of the cauteries according to this form without alteration:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cautery with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, cautery by pricking and bleeding above the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see of enche; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, while it is forced from its natural complexion by excess; the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then the patient must be attended upon his hatred; and make three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the costal regions of the body come; and let there be the size of a thumb between each cautery; and may the cauteries be long like the body, and do not press much with your hand all over the cautery; and let it be burned only half of the heart, and let the patient lie straight on his back; and if he cannot, then lie down, stretch out his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is so, cauterize these cauteries of the cuticular, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up all the body; and let it not come to boil, for the heart is very delicate there, and the wise ones to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe; and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment causes the boils to come to a head, it is necessary that the patient be treated on his head; and then lance the vein or abscess, and then heat the cautery which resembles fire, of which its form is thus.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the cautery until the coals are burned out, and let it come to scabbing, until all the pus is gone; after the cure according to the cure of sores until it be healed; and it should not be that any person who has studied long in the art of medicine use any more than these from this cautery, and by whose hands these diseases have been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, and always it seems to me that women value it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	for the cautery of pleuresin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleuresin cautery, one should use roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: take a root of aristolochia long, the longest you can find, and dry it. Make it as thick and as long as your thumb; crush it to extract the juice, and warm it over fire, then apply the cautery between the forcele and the neck, and two small cauteries slightly downward in the part beneath the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declinated a bit backward; and one cautery under the penis, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two more on the ribs below the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but apply it openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it is said by some ancient ones that none use the fire cautery in imitation of a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it comes to this abscess; and then the pain goes away, as we have said in the chapter on the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula arises which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one method is such that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before; and do not press your hand against all parts of the cautery, and let the patient be often on his back; and another method of cautery is such that you heat the cautery with two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the liver which is opposite the mouse, or where the pain comes from the left side, and let the elevations you lift the liver according to the liver, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After letting the two burned nerves swell until the cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the fire cautery, and thus it will have four. And if you see, cauterize all the way to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has rotted for a long time, and this must be done differently from the previous wounds.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help much, then you must make four cauteries around the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back near the spine, and one at the heel of the foot; and let the cauteries be close to the core of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After let the cautery open to drain pus long enough, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be like that which we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as described earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydroptic and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the ring finger; and remove your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would burn yellowish, and let the cauterizes be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on two legs two cauterizations in each leg at the point of the dagger; and let the cauterizations be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, between the legs; and leave the cauterizations long without curing, as the yellowish color comes out; after that cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the reduction
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by ordinary means; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken about earlier concerning the cauterization of the stomach, at the circular cauterization. And four cauterizations between the subtle parts under the jaw for each subtle cauterization, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, make him undergo the fire cautery on the armpit, and two cauterizations on each leg, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are old and numerous, being large cold and moist humors corrupted, and have been treated as we said in divisions, if it does not benefit, make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that one just above the iliac crest a little bit at a time in a triangular manner, and one over the navel two days later; and if you think his stomach is cooled down, and the meat does not cook, and we see the flesh swelling, then make the large cauterization on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the whole body; leave the cauterization open long enough.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is sane.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carbuncle which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the carbuncle, heat the cautery to seem like a razor, and then place it fully burning on the carbuncle being treated; and let your hand remain until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which blood will flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much carbuncle, cauterize each part as we have said; after that, apply beneficial ointments until it heals; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will describe in its place, comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula and it is infected with decayed pus and moisture, you should probe the entire length of the wound with a sharp probe, and ensure that you know the full length of the wound.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to a scorching temperature, insert it into the fistula according to the length that the probe has entered, and repeat the cautery process until the decayed and corrupted flesh is burned through once, or two or three times, as required; and beware of burning the nerves within, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these symptoms, and do not make them elsewhere but in the fleshy part, and think that it is not persons [pus]; after curing the wound until it is healed, and if the flesh is healed for a long time, then know that the flesh is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the flesh is torpid, and the bones are corrupted at the root; and thus as one of these we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys and with much wind, and does not take hold of a woman, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other using the clavile cautery that we have already mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you should perform a cautery on the part below the bladder where the hairs begin at the base of the penis, both on the right and left side. Each cautery should be as long as one inch. And you make the cautery above the spine if needed; and let the cauteries be round according to the form previously described.
de la marris	of the gallbladder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the gallbladder is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then you should make three cauteries between the thighs, as we have said for the bladder's cautery, and two cauteries above the spine; and let the cauteries be round, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the thick mucus descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it dislocates from its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the source of departure is found in the vein. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the bone around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have such a cautery at hand, make three cauteries of olive oil, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the rest; and continue to treat until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the socket of the hip, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with bitter pills or other good pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards, you apply a fire cautery; and the manner of the fire cautery is according to two methods: namely a combination of hot medicines, and a fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is done in many ways, of which one method is as follows: you cauterize the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this form, and each should be well deep and large, with an interval between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive oil; once done, a cauterization is made in the middle on the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, apply the cautery in the shape of a circle as we have already described before regarding the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all the hip, and all the parts of the knee be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then apply two cauteries where the patient says the pain is felt, and above the ankle four inches, on the left side a bit. Let the cautery be either cutaneous or burn the thickness of the knee; and if the patient feels the pain extend two inches or close to the foot, apply the cautery where he feels the pain three or four points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the task requires it, and he feels that the pain is from below the knee to the thigh, then perform a cautery with a cutellaire or circular cautere, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautere on too long so as to burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that you do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it on too long until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly purge from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, perform a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, as follows: Make such a rod and let it be at the head as thick as a newfinger or a bit less, and interweave it so that between the weaves there is the distance of an inch-nail's width from one weave to another; let the weaves be over two parts, and let them be like nuts, and have the handpiece of iron well made; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and emits steam, then place it on the socket of the diseased hip, and turn it over to the healthy side. And apply the cautery once with the cautery rod and leave it for three days; then make a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery little due to the fear of its gaze, and see few who use it; nevertheless, whoever can endure it, let them apply it where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery for burning medicine is such that you make the instrument of iron rods through which the margin of the mouth passes, and it should be made of tin or iron, one long piece, and at a height of two fingers, with each having the thickness of a thumb; they should be open at the top and above, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their side on a clean surface, and pressing your hand firmly on the hip box; afterwards, pour hot oil between the two circles that has been heated over fire to a slight degree, and let it remain for about an hour to several hours, allowing the patient to endure the heat and the burning sensation from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found to be similar to a bite from a venomous creature; and when the bite has passed, withdraw your hand with the instrument and gently raise the thigh, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the cauterization is removed; and leave it three days until corruption is driven away; and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, apply the instrument gently according to what you did for the thigh increasing it; and this is the manner of the warm application, and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	or if it has a small hole that could be pierced by the point of a razor; and place another pot well weighted, and put ashes and charcoal and sweet aw on top, until there are two on top of the powders as you will have thoroughly prepared with your hand; and let it remain thus until the awe descends in water and grease or can be weighted, then take all that awe, and throw it on charcoal and on alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very much water and is administered in doses of medical work and in cauteries of other limbs. For it performs the same work as fire, and to other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip like terebinth and honey and cardash root and charcoal with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where a noble was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and the loincache, and says that no other treatment was done, and he was cured at one time when this treatment was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in such a manner that you take fresh and dry litargire vert, and grind it greatly with a little fat, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is felt, and leave it on; and when three hours have passed, remove it as the patient no longer feels the heat.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and make him go to bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such a cautery with these medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheep's dung, it helps much; and the cautery should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the depression between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards, take dry sheep's dung, and heat it on fire until it becomes coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is extinguished; and do this again, and continue in this manner until you think by sense that it comes to the hip, and that the pain is ceased; and this way of cauterization is called "sheep's dung cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back from falling or percussion or due to too great an evacuation or similar to matter expanded cold, none of these circumstances calls for cautery, though it may be necessary for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It must be that the patient is void of foul pills or other similar matters. Then, upon the back where the pain resides, make three lines signed with enche, and in each line use five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight throat when they arise, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and find it needs to be treated, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	That the cauterization for each part of the spine increases accordingly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize between the spines with a painful fire cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment of the limb until it is healed as we have said, and make sure you do not apply a fire cautery to swelling that is in the spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moisture spread throughout all the limbs of the body, and when pain comes from the feet, which doctors call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by treatments or medicines, it is treated with fire cauteries in this manner: make many fire cautery marks around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to prick the sole of the foot, let the cautery be as large as what we call "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make a fire cautery on each knee three or four of each part, for the entire olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do more, but keep your hand out only as long as the wax from the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, apply the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks around the finger two lines wide; and if there is still pain in the fingers, make pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or come down to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and gentle medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the side
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture comes in intestines, and the bowels descend into the groin and this is newly occurred, it must be that when you see it to be cured, he should not eat that day; and should use things that relieve the stomach, so that the fæces descend from his stomach; after which make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his buttocks steady until the bowels are repaired, and hold them with your fingers, and mark over the rupture under the bone of the thigh, and make a sign that be like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery as is its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	while it remains white and gives off scents.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels in their place; and the ministers keep their hands on them so they do not return. Work well on the thighs for the patient, and place the cook and the squire on the thighs, and the other one on the foot that holds your hands. Then place the cautery at the sign on all your fingers, and hold it straight and keep holding until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach the bone the first time, repeat again another time until you come to the bone. Be careful that the bowels do not protrude when you apply the cautery; do not burn them; and so that the patient does not die or suffer other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your efforts amount to nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the cautery for children is subtle according to the size of their fingers, and likewise for adults according to their size; after three days, cure the area around the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards, apply other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient rest on their back for forty days until the wound is well closed; and it must be that his nourishment is prolonged, so that boils do not emerge when he goes to rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him wear a well-made bandage, and keep it for another ten days; have good rest, letting him work little and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of too much shouting; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment to shave in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not increase, then let the fire cautery be applied according to its quantity, and may it be burned for one-third of the circumference; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the midpoint of the wound and draw a line along its width above the rupture, and another below it, and run your hand through all the cautery points.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is relieved by the first cauterization, that is well; but if not, you must repeat the other cauterization over it, for it is customary to move toward the limb nearest to the pain. Therefore, you must make the cauterizations until the patient is relieved.
de meselerie	by means of craftiness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are sometimes aided once by the fire cautery with great help, and especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see the disease is to be cauteryed, take care that it is at the beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and neither subsides nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then I make V cauteries on the head: I place one above the ear near the front towards the forehead to the end of the hair; II on the two horns, and III behind on the occipital bone; and I leave your hand so that the cautery goes as far as the bone, and until the scabs are removed such that the vapors from the thick humors can escape; and cautery the neck according to what is said before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it clearly pertains, then you should cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery on the nose, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large on the chest and another on the side, and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossa of the hand; and beware of the nerves that are behind the last heel, that you do not burn them; and at no time make a cauterization on the bone of the thigh, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you make a cauterization, the more aid you do, and it profits the sick; and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cauterization as the healthy do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you will find in kinds of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, apply a paste of flour and honey with other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, but it is not yet healed, then make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery enter slightly into the thickness of the skin; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes a cautery is made by hand and with a poker and on the back, at the end of the nerve that renders the member motionless, and thus the swelling is removed; but in any case, no one should do it unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of scabs
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is mature, and the means of medicine are ineffective, then cauterize with a cautery somewhat fervent, according to the thickness of the crust, until the whitishness is gone and its color changes; then cure with flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and of colostrum and almond milk, one part of each; mix all together, and bind with a cloth, and apply to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cauterization of the chancre
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the chancre begins and you see it stop, cauterize with a circle-shaped cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the surgeons said that one should make a fire cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think this is good at all, for I fear it might become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once; it is more appropriate to cauterize between them, using the cautery called "circule," as we said when discussing cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it is slow to die or due to the excess it produces or the age of the patient (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or due to the tension; and you see that it should hasten to die: then cauterize extensively with many small cauteries by pricking; after, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Car she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced through the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the other side in this manner so that the course of putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a corrosion of the member, for it eats away at the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a patient who can bear the cautery with all fire, then heat the clavile cauteries very little and much, according to what is fitting for the part or where the disease is; after cauterizing from all sides until you have eradicated all the corruption, so that nothing of it remains, that everything which is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and place on the cauterized parts a sufferable dressing with oil until the burn marks from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the application of ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, that is good; and if it does not, then repeat the cauterization on what remains corrupted from the parts that were cauterized.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture has sometimes been cured with aqueous medicine instead of the fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the treatment for the aqueous medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of blisters that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, at the feet due to fires, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that hardens the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, the fire cauterization, and the hot aqueous cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the cautery point as if it were a vault pen. And let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can hold the nail in all parts, and that it have thin edges; after, put it very hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make a plaster of wild mallows crushed with salt, and keep the plaster on all night, and the nails will fall out and be拔出。
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then anoint the limb with healing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire on the body, and this happens many times in hands and feet, you must apply a hot water cautery; and it is done in this manner: take a coal of charcoal or iron, or a vault pen, and put it over the nail and the althelia, that is to say, for warts; then put the coal on so that it burns around, and pour a little hot wax over it, and hold your hand well, pressing your hand by turning until the edge of the coal comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep way down to the root; and let the patient endure a little the burning from the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be eradicated with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make one after another until you dry all that is in the body, then treat the wounds that are caused by burns.
li cure dou trembler	treat the shivering
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake from cold or fear, or from quartan fever or other fevers, it is necessary that you make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the shoulder, and one on the stomach with the olive cautery; if this stops the shivering, and hastens the recovery of the patient's health.
des pustules puans	pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times apparent through the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary at the first appearance that a cauterization be performed on each head of the pustule: a fine wood cauterizer from juniper, with its point heated by fire, or from long pepper root, or a lentil-shaped cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at any time after cauterization when they appear in the beginning as such, and do not have the tendency to grow further, but the excess is cut off from which they come, and are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great losses of blood from the artery that is cut during the wound, or in incising an abscess, or with a cauterizer on the member, and similar things; and it is a most grievous thing to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more tastes of it come out; then put the olive fire cautery, both small and large, in the flame until they are all red; then take one, whether great or small according to the wound and the limb where the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are used, so take quickly another from the cauteries that are in the flame.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is coagulated; and guard that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm come to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well coagulated itself when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines placed there that have power to coagulate blood; and let it be tied and held immediately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat the stench from lime closely with cloths or put burning things there, or other similar things, if it does not help much, then it should be discontinued.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and he has neither sight nor medicine present, he must place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it well so that it is stenchy above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but let the flesh be cooled often until it is very cold so that the pus is frozen and engorged and stenchy; and make inquiries in advance of what he needs for cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on wound treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter where it is necessary to use the fire cautery or a burning medicine, and we have discussed the oquisons and their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter from head to feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way because one finds more easily what one wishes.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And since I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you undertake no folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come so ill with their disease that they die lightly from the fury of their disease, and from the greatness of their wickedness; and one should have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more careful thought into your honor than into your greed, and do not give rashly but prudently what you are certain of and which you can take back; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients for whose health it will be converted; and this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear friend, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed this chapter by discussing it section by section, as I did in the chapter on fire cauteries, where I spoke of the head down to the feet, because you will find it more easily comprehensible.
dou chief plein d’aigue	of the head full of fluid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often occurs in infants at birth, and when the baille (midwife or attendant) holds the head of the infant too tightly; and sometimes it comes from the reason given that no one noticed.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and among those I have seen it, death hastened; and because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the work in partial cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen the child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head grew larger each day until it could no longer bear it; and because of the moisture, he died. This moisture is collected under the bone at the site of the syphacia, between the heart and the bone. The work must be such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision through the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, as far as the moisture extends. And see here the shape of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the mouth opened on each side, and the hard lump jumps when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the incisions with dressings and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days; then remove the dressing, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head dry evenly. Then give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look where the abscess is largest, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Mark then where the abscess is largest, and the filling of the pus, and make a cut according to what you can; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and let blood, so that the patient dies from the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the testicles, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the last remedy is the cautery with that of which one will cauterize the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the patient lose consciousness, instruct the patient to turn his head; after which rub the neck with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then squeeze the patient's neck from all sides; then observe where the vein lies, and the knots on both sides are behind the ears, and some are covered; then mark the knots with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatule from two sides, so that the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done by the width of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, place the spatule over the artery and cut above it, cutting as much as twice through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the touch, you must measure the length of a thumb's width three times, then cut and saw until reaching the bone; the amount of blood to be let out is six pennyweights, and by chance perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of syphilis, apply the cloth with which we dress abscesses, and let it not get wet, then drain the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient emigrainne comes, and acute cataract, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and old, ancient fever and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medicinal treatments and all such means do not benefit it, then extract the arteries in the temples and use cautery, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient make behind the hairs of his temples, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little responsive outside in only some very cold persons; and if it is responsive, the patient draws his neck with some threads, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and soaks the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatillum of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then cauterize the skin lightly until you see the artery, then draw it up with forceps and cut it well from the tissues beneath each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the point of the hook, then scrape that area according to the size of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, neither will the stone pass completely through.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw off the blood from six veins, until three remain; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a double strong silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the suddenness of the wound, and no further bleeding occurs; then cut out the superfluous part between the two ties at that very hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the surgical cautery down to the bone until the shoulders are cut out; and this is the major work, if the patient has no fever and he is of hot temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization is help in ending the moistures; for it is of greater help to the moister conditions.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the arm with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; when you release them, they should be treated with dry medicines that produce flesh and bandages until they are healed; and if without cord from the artery as much as you work, then hasten by cautery, or use the leaf of vitriol and squeeze it with your hand to make the cord coagulate; and if you do not have this present, place on the arm a weight so that the cord freezes, and wet the cotton with cold water until the cord ceases, and hold it as necessary; that which is more dried and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cautery the vein from this cutting cautery divided into two parts, but the cuts should be well-spaced to ward off longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too cold, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be a large piece of ginger between the two knives, and then when you have signed on both sides, heat the bone until it comes just to the bone, and incise the vein in two places; and they should be kept apart between the two heads because this cautery is not sealed from all to all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing down veins that are above the test of the head, and medicine cure does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel or see movement on the forehead like trembling; and the eyes are cold and moist so that the hairs of paper fall out, and the papers are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, it has need of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it by the ancients "cure contuse", and you should make three equal incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this illness, according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as deep as two doins running down from above until the nose, and the other two at the sides above the sinews, and beware not to incise the arteries that are at the sides above the sinews; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the lower jaws, and let each wound be the size of three doins through; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much linen to wipe off the blood, then apply sharp spatumile from both sides as it is made.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is from the temple to the second incision; and brandish all the cheek which is over the sinew above the bone, then do the same from the middle incision until the other second one, and then withdraw firmly this spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert into the first cut the instrument called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is a scoop, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the blade cutting towards the buttock at the core, and the scoop blade towards the bone, and keep it in place until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And scrape all the vessels that descend along the eyes until the incision is continuous up to those that open at the core, and then make another cut in the middle cut up to the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the lymph for the blood taken; then place a tent of old cotton in each cut, and cover with moist cloths in wine and oil and grease, and guard that abscesses do not appear; and on the third day untie the bandage, and apply a large dressing of warm water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of eye pain
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone frequently gets acute catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with weakening of vision, and burning paper; and the nose secretes a watery discharge, and causes pain; and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these materials and this catarrh come only from many veins, and the treatment that is effective is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another one of lesser width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go until the bone is exposed; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating. When the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton and linen; then cover above with moistened cloth in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with excitative things that cause flesh to grow.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a manner: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colocynth, and make a poultice; and apply it to the wounds to draw out flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or mineral stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as oats, beans, peas; or effluents such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear a stone or some other kind of thing that does not stick to the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it distils a little violet oil or safflower oil, then proceed with its extraction; and cause him to sneeze by condisi, and plug his nostrils when he sneezes, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often it comes to discharge through this treatment; and if it does not come to discharge, proceed with the extraction using fine forceps, of which the form is described here.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it discharges through the forceps, that is good; if not, proceed with the extraction using a fine awl of small thickness; and if it does not discharge through this, make an araignée cane and insert the head of the cane or hole of the ear firmly, and plug the area around the cane with soft wax so that the liquid cannot enter with the cane; then draw it out thoroughly, for often it discharges as we have said; and if it does not discharge in this manner, take glue and place the tweezers in it, and put any instrument that is suitable for this into place, and put a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue over the stone or whatever it is, and draw it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not break from all these things that we have said, hasten to incise the ear as one would an abscess, and spasm; and the manner of incision is that you first draw the patient into a position favorable for the operation, and extract the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the patient's ear between your hands and turn it upward, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends; and let the incision be as narrow as a crescent until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is enclosed and swollen, administer the extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the spatule with a thin blade according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine tongs and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that falls into the ear, then the patient should use nose blowing with initial conditions, and plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it drains forcefully through that, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of your fingers and make them warm on fire. And place one stone in the patient's ear and hold another piece of stone from the other side, striking the stone in the ear with a different stone. Do not stop striking stone against stone until the water drains forcefully out, and thus it will drain forcefully. If you see this, take a rush, and insert one end of the rush into the ear, and the other end near fire until the softer part of the rush is burned. Then repeat with other rushes until the water drains completely, as we have said in the case of stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size and can be felt, use forceps for the extraction; and this is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and treat distillations, and if the cure does not help much, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are visible worms, remove them with fine forceps, and if they do not appear, take the wick of cotton mentioned here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow inside and wide outside.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then thoroughly along the canal; do this often until all the wax comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, stuff the ear canal with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they do not protrude forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the extraction of worms, and you will find them treated in the section on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which the form is as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of thin silver or tin wire with small holes on the sides and above for distillation; and to press within the distillation apparatus, use a well-made iron instrument for this purpose. If you wish, take a razor and wrap a fitting piece of cotton around its point; then pour in your oil or juice, and the medicines you desire into the canal, with the canal in the ear. Then insert the razor fully into the cotton, and press firmly with your hand until the oil is distilled or movement from the ear ceases. Let the mixture cool slightly over fire as when distilling into the ear; and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the blocking of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no perforation in the ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound blocking up or a tumor growing inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes come so completely that one cannot see them; and sometimes the perforation is just barely blocked, and the opening can still be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes so completely blocked that one cannot see it is of great concern for treatment, and in such cases, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the visible blockage or opilation, then the work has been completed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, so that it does not damage the ear; if the excision is of new flesh or an ear wax mass, hold it with fine forceps, and remove it gently, until all the flesh is taken out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the excision is performed in the ear, take the fine razor gently and heat it a little on fire, then place it over the ear wax.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the excision causes pain in the ear, pierce it gently, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a wick in the ear according to the size of the opening, and smear it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this on any day while the wound is healing, or take a tent and marrow in rose water, and powder on glass vitriol ground; and if you see swollen ear, it must be that you remove the tent and apply another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then treat until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are or involve distillation.
de la char des papieres	from the juice of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and are dried, you must extend them with tongs and forceps, and cover the head with a spatule made from its roots; then place on the head glass vitriol ground.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without scraping, cauterize with the delicate lens cautery, and the cauterizer after incision moves; often they return, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
de la gresle	Of the hailstone.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Often come from the eyes things that resemble hailstones in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "hail," and it is a collection of moisture large on the surface and underneath; the procedures are such: observe whether the hail moves from one side to another, and this is a light matter to know; then make it wide, then burn each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and extract it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cope it without piercing a little the paper, it does not harm the patient at all; and if the wound is large,缝合并用线缝合，直到它痊愈；如果很小，则无需用力，因为膏药很快就能治愈并促进肉芽组织生长。
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the gravel descends into the inner ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and remove the gravel with tweezers, and cope and press it from one side to the other; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not harm anything; and when the gravel is coped, wash the eye with salt water, and cure the head of what promotes flesh growth until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is embedded in the membranes of paper-like structures above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and greatly grieves their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and for this reason, they lie down on their faces and sleep there, and are covered with their damp paper-like membranes that inflame and obscure the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the shoulder between your fingers and feel the exinach within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient places his head on your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained by the exinach from each part, then place it over him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make a groove in the middle of the moist area, cutting a slit wide enough, and not more than the wound made in the healthy vein; and let the skin grow perfectly until you see the exinach; and from many dispositions, the exinach comes out through the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the wound completely and place a piece of cloth between your fingers at the edge. Turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and keep watch that you do not injure the fender, that you do not come all the way to the spatumile up to the eye, that you do not blind him.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extract does not open at the beginning of the fender, widen the opening slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then apply moistened cloth and water, and place over the edge, and extract with threads.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men who grind grain and put it there to腐化 those remaining moistures.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is an abscess hot in the wound, treat with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When on paper hairs grow other than those natural, and they are mature, they harm the eyes, and bring about conditions similar to habituated tearing and softening of the paper and albugine, such that it is a cause for the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by applying fire cauterization together with heat, or by medicinal treatments as described in the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cairnes [a type of cauterizing tool], according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the head of the patient in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is turned inward, that is good; if not, insert a needle along the thread above; let this be from the margin of the paper or where the hair grows among these hairs, and draw the thread upwards over the entire paper, then cut it off with the razor; then make an incision under the paper, beneath the added hairs, to all the spatumile copant, from the large tearer to the small one; then extract the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and silk under the paper, then sign over the paper a figure of enchye, as the laurel leaf, and always it must be that the figure is according to the quantity that you wish to lift from the paper which is divided for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if one needs much of the paper according to how it is softened; then make at all the spatumile above the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large lacrimal jusc’a small; and let there be one of the cracks near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put an ounce in one of the II angles of the keur, then burn it completely; then join the II lips with a stitch using a needle and all the fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and do away with the superfluous threads above the II sorcilz at any sticky things, if you wish to make this; and if not, have no care for it, then leave the stitch and the threads until III days or IV; then cure the wound without a stitch using dry and constraining things, because the paper revives suddenly from the wound and its joining, but the stitch is worn out (as the ancients said), and these are works without fear; and in another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as like the leaf of laurel, as we have recounted, at III ounces severed according to the form which is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply those that surpass the small forces evenly according to the form which is given here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the things are not equal, take a needle or thread, and put one thread through the figure; and place the other thread beside the large wound, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above what you have marked, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointment; and any time the hair of the paper is reversed, you must use what we said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the canes is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the fen[de] within according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and as wide as the space between the fingers; and cope with the two heads of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above that which rises from the paper of the eye, and restrain the two canes from the two sides form[ed]; and let it thus for some days, and the skin which was restrained will die and nerve and perish, until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then cope with strength, and cure until it is sane. And when the wound is healed, and the paper is lifted, and no hairs will grow; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you insert a fine needle, and thread a thin silk thread through it; then join the heads and tie them tightly together, and let the lengths of the threads be one palm long; then sew another thin silk thread briefly, and tie its head to the thread; then put the patient's head into your healthy side; and keep away from the sun so that the operations may become clear, for it is a fine and delicate work. Then insert the needle along the root of the added hair, and make it pierce through the hastern paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the seam in the paper, and put into the seam that hair if there be one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs emerge from the seam with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not grow out with it, you shall draw the chase away from above to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase seems to have passed through the perforation and that you see it by the eye's vision; then you shall draw the chase and the thread, close the wound and let it close for two or three days, until the hairs grow in their place and flesh grows above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair of natural hair, and raise it with that or leave it, until it is elongated and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the putrefaction of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction, comes into the oil, there are two ways of it: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or surgery, or the fire cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut the suture, and separate the edges of it, and put linen tents inside, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not fitting that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first; but use works of softening things, such as fenugreek; and washes with water or urine and linseed that is cooked, and ointments melted into any of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care so that it does not heal entirely according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental comes from wounds and splits and cauteries and similar things; and the way of this work is that you take a needle, in which there be double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make the thread pierce from left lachrymal gland to right, so that the threads come out at both heads of the flesh; then leave the flesh above on all sides by the needle, and the cloth on the broad sponge.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the crack, turn the paper, and make two cracks inside the paper; and let the heads of the two cracks be at the angles of the incision you have made, and make such angles that when they are assembled, the figure is as one would be for a letter which has no "i griseche"; then remove the flesh according to the quantity that its edges are cut from underneath, from what follows the paper, then attach the two separated parts with a linen thread; then apply the cure of what we have said about softening medicines and tents until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a crack or suture or cautery, you must make a full crack underneath the hairs of the paper, according to what is said before; then separate between the two flaps of a tent as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is much diverse in form. The master surgeons prepare devices with all their skill so that they may make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what needs to be done and instruments in various preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this缝合 happens to a person in such a manner that the paper above is hardened with the white of an egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must accordingly put the point of a needle under the paper, and lift it up; and hold it with forceps until you cut away what is attached to the fine spatumile, which should not be too harsh or too sharp so that the patient cannot endure the spatumile being too harsh or bleaching the eye; and make your incision, by which you burn together the assembled parts gently, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all that is assembled heals completely, and does not create any once in an aigui salee eye, and lifts with sweet water, and from anger; then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wet wool soaked in abundant egg; and after three days use binding things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nail of the eye is according to two manners: it is nervous and seems like a hard cornea, and another which is not nervous but seems like white moist ice, that when touched with iron and carefully tended with tweezers, one cannot remove; and both seem to begin near the large lacrimal gland, growing little by little until they cover all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient place their head on your lap, then open their eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then clip the nail with small tweezers, stretching it above; then take a needle, and put horse hair, or goat hair, or beef hair, and a strong thread. Double the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing through the entire length of the needle, and attach the nail to a thread, stretching it above, and scrape along the side of the nail that leaves the seam and the silk up to the root, then cut off the remaining part from the lacrimal gland to the fine spatumile with small force, leaving the natural skin or lacrimal gland, so that the body does not produce tears through this incision as it is accustomed; sometimes only the nail and thread are stretched, as we have said; then scrape along all the fine spatumile where its form lies.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatule does not touch the fleshy lining and does not tear it, and that the probe is not perforated; and after the incision, pour a little sieved salt into the eye, and a collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat with what is needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the awls cannot enter, often this resemblance of a nail is treated with medicines; and they come to pass as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it copulate, work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatule slightly sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And scrape the nail gently from above, and if you see that it thins slightly and the root presses closer, distill into the eye from your mouth a collar made of litharge and a red collar and sieved salt, and plug the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same method until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, such as an abscess, then let it alone, and first treat the warm abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the gland causes great harm to the eye, suspend it by an oncine, and excise a part but not entirely, so that tears do not arise; then distill into the eye red powder made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises around the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of some men's eyes, red flesh arises once and covers the pupil, is fixed on paper and turned to drain, seeming like a hyacinth flower; and the work is such that the patient places his head in your good direction, then turns the eyes, and all this red flesh is removed with appropriate oncines, and it is suspended by force; then excise the first flesh, and continue cutting close until the end, and take care not to injure the eye during the work; and let the incision of the ciliary body be as we have said in the incision of the nail with small forces from which one removes the swelling, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all flesh is removed, fill the eye with ground salt or distill red powder into it and use wet cloth with egg yolk over the eye to ensure a warm abscess; if nothing remains and the wound heals well, and you are unsure of a warm abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe a warm abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do for any further flesh that arises in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it must be that you adjust the treatment of each weak eye from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this limb suffers from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, they allow the work to be seen and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, it is necessary for the first step that you examine whether the eye, where the redness is, is out, and there is no other disease besides the redness; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy hand, then suspend those veins by an ounce according to your wisdom, and let the ounces be doubly subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two ounces by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the veins subtly with forceps, and wipe away the blood hour after hour until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to damage the eye with the points of the forceps, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not harm any veins; and when you have done this, distill in the eye a mixture of green and red colcothar to corrupt what remains of the swelling.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot coil all of them in that hour, apply a poultice to the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and assured that the hot abscess is gone, then resume this method as described until it is healed; and this is the form of the forceps.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire (fistula) is called "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and medicine of hot water as I have said before, and it is not healed, then you indeed cut over the abscess, in the place where it should die, and draw out all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is revealed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then proceed with all the instrument of which this is the form; and it is called "asperchief," and be made from iron to the head of it, and be pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the bone patch of the corrupted one, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the bone patch of medicinal desiccatives.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is fused, and flesh arises, and the core of the bone is fused, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not regenerate and is not an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed; if not, there is another way to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the neck according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and with wet medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a saw according to this form, and let the iron head have three angles, and the shaft be thin until the tip as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone near the eye, and keep your hand away from the eye a little, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by the fluid that is there if he keeps his hand on his nose; and then restore the head of medicine with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the head, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are completely opened, and there is no dislocation or reduction, it is necessary to tie the patient. Then heal them, then place cups or pustules without piercing to suck, then put on the eye a lien made of myrrh and aloes and incense and sarcolle, and then drain the eye, and plaster with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft enough cloths, double each one four times, and then place one over the other according to the quantity the eyes need. Then drain it from above with a hard form bandage, and repeat the cups to suck without piercing; then remove the cups and let the eye be held day and night, and if the lien becomes soft, you must tighten it much; then remove the lien after day and night, and if you see the eye heal, that is good; but if not, continue with the plastering and cloths and lien and cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	for the tearing of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	when disruptions come in the vein, then open and burst, coming out like grains of resin, and are shocking to see; then if you see it coped, the operations are such that you stick a needle at the root of the part beneath until above, then stick another needle with double thread from the eyelid part; and make it pierce, and let the first needle remain according to its position; then cut the leu of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and put on the eye a cloth moistened in abundance of egg; and leave it until the threads are healed with the vein, then cure the eye with things that comfort as long as the wound is sound; and at no time restrain the wound from every part of a circle of cloth until it is sound.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, pierce them with a sharp needle coming from the temple next to the eye, drain the white moisture and let the eyes drop in quickly; then extract them when they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not in the socket of the eye which is gathered in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance is such that you cause the patient to sit on a chair properly aligned, then take the head between your hands from one side, and move the neck until you see the socket come above your eyes; then pierce it, and do not let it descend, and clear the light, and the patient will see things as they should; and if it does not descend underneath, know that it is water, and if the descents of the socket are not aligned as we have said, know that it is water.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make incisions on the corneal membrane gradually along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the corona, until the bow is out; and when it has emerged, distill hot aqueous honey or boiled fenugreek water mixed with honey into the eye, then cure it with another dressing until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have placed the similarities of the eye's waters in the division, and those that need to be pierced; work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands crossed, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if they are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda," or on your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then put the point of the instrument near the corona by the thickness of a finger into that part of the outer canthus where the tear duct is located, and firmly insert the instrument called "almagda" so that it pierces through the inner corner of the eye, feeling when almagda reaches the empty space; and the size of the path of almagda should be precisely equal to the measure from the prunele to the end of the noirour; this is the corona of the eye; you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument directly where the fluid is, and express it through another passage.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the liquid flows out now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the liquid rises again by the second vein, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, gently extract it by turning your hand slowly; then put a bit of silk thread around it, and remove this from the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place something to plug the eye, such as a moistened piece of wool in rose oil and abundant egg, and secure it with healthy eye tissue.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those of our time, we place on with a cloth soaked in abundant egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it hardens to the extent that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which its form is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then pour in the hardening substance as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a sleeping position in the dark place on his back; and let him be free from all movements, and give him light foods, and move neither his head nor to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his condition until three days; then release him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and have him show some things, and then rebind him until seven days; and it is not fitting that you do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but you must loosen it, because the fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess is present, you release the eye before the seventh day, and follow the treatment for one who alleviates an abscess; when it is pacified, you release the vision and place over its face a small skin to cover any day, and let it be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and adapt to it; know that no deacon should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some twenty came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda puncts, which they suck with water, but truly I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of scabies, for he who does not know them will be deceived; and they are properly of arsenic.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there arise or appear malformed noses, of which some seem to have the feet of scorpions; and there are such that have a nose embedded in flesh of a dark color, and others with a nose sprouting from flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those noses that are sprouting but not embedded, you must place the patient between your hands against the sun; work on his nostrils, and sprinkle an ounce of powder over those noses, and remove them. Proceed carefully with what you can sustain at the subtle acute point from one side, until you know that the nose is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that we cannot cope with, open it completely with all the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing remains; and if it surmounts without or an abscess chaus, give him the help as it should be; and if it is malign abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus be stanched and all the flesh be removed, then throw out ash, oil, or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose heals and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, where the instruments could not reach: then you must put a slightly thick linen thread, which has been knotted by our hands, between each knot with enough or less space; and place the patient's head at the nostril end in such a way as to allow the thread to be drawn through the nostril into the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is a light thing for him who knows how to do it; then hold the chief that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other chief that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and draw them alternately while attending to us who are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it so that you know the nerves have corrupted that flesh, then draw the thread, wipe the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh; then put a cane of plonc in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, to which one distills the eyes and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be made of silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it in thus; and if you see, make it a closed cane, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; have one hand at the head to hold it when we heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	many times a disease arises at the top of the nose called "telul", grows and becomes large, to such an extent that it is visible upon looking; and because of this, you must lance it at the beginning, and extract all the pus, then apply a fire cautery or burning medicine over it; and if one delays lancing until it becomes large, one must be careful if it is hard, of a fleshy color, and has little sense: do not touch it with iron at all because it is an embedded abscess, for when it is lanced once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is due to heat contact, not of a fleshy color, and you can see that one can lance it completely, empty the patient and lance carefully without fear, and cure it with dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilages in the work, it profits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to any person, examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then approximate the two lips with a缝合，直到痊愈；如果嘴唇一侧干燥而另一侧湿润，那么必须将所有部分的边缘灼烧直至痊愈，然后用一线缝合，并绷紧，撒上龙血石粉末，研碎的香料；再在粉末上放置一块强力膏药或其他粘贴膏药，直到自行愈合，之后涂抹油膏直至痊愈。
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is such that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in suturing the belly; or by thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	By hand, abscesses appear in the lips hard, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; then it must be that you turn the lips, incise on each side, and take out each part with forceps; then apply leu after the incision of vitriole broiet, until the blood is stanched; and then apply linseed, and cure the leu with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a hard bump arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; it must be held with tongs and cut at its root, allowing the juice or blood to flow; then place vitriol powder or other drying powders over the head; if that bump returns after incision, often it happens, so cut again and cauterize: it does not return after the cauterization; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of sorts
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes, bumps are assembled at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scaly skin that is ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and worm-eaten, as decay comes to the gums, making the teeth stinky; it must be that you place the patient in your hands, and their head on your lap, and remove any teeth or scales visible, until nothing remains; thus clean the blackness and greenishness and yellowness and other stains, until they are all removed; and if what is to be removed according to the first reason is good, it is well; but if not, you must start again on the second day and the third, until you have cleaned everything; know that teeth need various forms of instruments to clean them, depending on which type of work they show, because the rasps used to remove teeth have different shapes from those used between the teeth; these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the tooth for its pain, you should delay the extraction as long as possible, for it must not be done at all if one can help it; for it is a substance very high up so that one cannot have any excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to extraction, it must be certain which tooth aches.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is from a sound tooth, and have the good tooth extracted; but in any case, the pain does not depart because of this until the bad tooth is removed, for we have often done so to these patients. And when you are well certain which tooth aches, it must be that you scrape around the tooth with a sharp instrument to protect the gum on all sides; then move it gently or with fine forceps at first little by little, until it is thoroughly loosened, then firmly secure the forceps; and place the patient's head in your lap between your knees, and hold them well so they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After drawing the tooth rightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and insert it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten into, it must be filled with wadding, lint, or cotton; and you should grip it gently with forceps so that it does not break when gripping; and you must work carefully around the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part behind, as this will cause the patient greater pain than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not do it as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through their haste and boldness, break the root once and do not provide what we have described; but they bring about great illness one time by incision due to the roots remaining or because of the bone they broke, as we often see. And when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or oil of olive and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often occurs, fill the mouth with vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one must first pull the teeth, should be long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting, and let them be made of well-forged iron, and let them have teeth to hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to place moistened cotton with butter on the wound for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is healed, then use the forceps called "algefri," of which the head resembles a surgical tool; and let them be made similarly to a file, and that is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as pliers, of which here is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and large so that it does not break easily, and if the root breaks through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you need to use an instrument that has two prongs, of which here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front according to the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument that seems like large tongs, of which here is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let it be that this instrument cannot be broken, and know that few dental instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the master surgeons find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of teeth, or if they break a part of the bone or another bone, or it rots, then one seeks the instruments that it is necessary to have, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-holding to keep the bone from escaping, but able to hold and remove it; then restore its place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, then let it be treated with all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural course, and their form is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know whether the teeth are born after the gum, and are not in the right place, and cannot be soothed nor smoothed: then you should file them; and if they are misaligned with the gum, take this instrument whose shape is as that of a small beak, and made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And file the teeth little by little in your hand for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that they can be smoothed, then smooth them with a piece of fine sandpaper as described.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the sandpaper used to make needles; and file the tooth little by little in your hand over several days gently, so that it does not move while it heals; then level it off at the end with a rasp. If the tooth is too sharp and causes the tongue to turn white, you must smooth its sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not turn the tongue white nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth chatter
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when the front teeth chatter due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press against what he eats without defecating, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, it is not effective; so you must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. And let the threads be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and bend it double between two healthy teeth, then place the points between the adjacent teeth, whether one or more, until you see clearly to the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover from where you began, and extract your hand delicately and carefully, so that it does not move at all; and let your grip be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the shoulder with a needle using forceps, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, and put it such that it does not damage the tongue; and then leave it so tight as it can remain, and if it loosens or the threads break, restrain it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, frequently as we have said; and one must not do so except by those who are skilled and suffer, and once the form of an osseous tooth of a deer is made, one places it in the place where it is missing, and restrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover up the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	no wound from the tongue by nature or accident comes thus; or by an accidental injury to a缝合的伤口；手术过程是这样的，你张开病人的嘴巴，让他的头靠在你的肩上，然后松开舌头；随后覆盖住大的神经伤口，直到舌头脱离其位置为止；如果有硬块或血肿，并且是由创伤突然引起的，那么使用钩针并从大血管下方的空隙中剪断该连接；注意不要让切口过于完美，以免损伤下面的大动脉；做完后，用玫瑰水或茴香水，或者冷水冲洗伤口，然后在舌头上放一块亚麻布绷带；每晚让病人躺下，确保伤口不会感染。
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the bleeding continues, put on the shoulder powdered glass; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a boil that is of a red, black, or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is turning white and there is moisture, you should lance it with an oncine weight, and make a small incision with a sharp lancet, and drain it on both sides; and if the blood does not stop during your treatment, put powdered glass on it until it is healed, then return to your treatment as long as you need to; afterwards remove the dressing of silk and salt, and treat with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are lumps in the throat called "godath," and these are properly known as two almonds. When you cure them, as we have said in the division, and if they are hard abscesses with small size and flesh-colored, be careful not to touch them with iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron at all, also for the evacuation of blood; but leave them until they are ripe, and then you can cut them, or they would break on their own. And if they are white in color and the root is fine, prepare the instrument to extract them, but first see if the abscess has cooled down and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, seat the patient facing the sun, and his head in your care, and let him close his mouth, and the sergeant hold the tool between his hands, pressing the tongue underneath the entire instrument, which is its form; it should be made of silver or fine tin as thin as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take an ounce and the prong in the almond shape, and draw force more on top than you can; then do not pull anything from the tissues, just withdraw it, which is its form, seeming like strong forces; and both ends are curved and one against the other, and are very sharp, made of iron indurated or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, use tongs, of which the form is:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other; and when you have incised one of the almonds, incise the other in the same manner. After the incision, gargle the patient with hot, sharp water, or with sharp water and easy to swallow. If bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with cold water, or cooked pomegranate peel, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched. Then cure the wound when it is healed; and if other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, incise them in the same manner as the two almonds evenly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had grown within her throat, namely the small abscess; and had almost completely closed the throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the obstructed passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had to be lanced through both openings of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then soon, and inserted the lancet into one opening, then drew out a large portion of the pus; then I reinserted it into the other opening of the neck, and cleaned her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the lancet into these abscesses, and drained part of it, and only a little bit of blood came out; and thus the passage in her throat was unclosed, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued cutting at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept recurring and filled up the space that I had drained until it became very large; then I treated it and cauterized inside her throat: thus it stopped from growing further; and I left those matters, and only let God decide what would happen to her after me.
de l’uve	from the eye socket
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When swelling occurs in the eye socket and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and when it is large and round, it is called "uve.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are calmed and are fine, then it is appropriate to lance it; and that which is round gathered and is not long; and which is bloody or of linen color or black, then it is appropriate to avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it in the manner as I have said, instruct the patient to sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the oncine into the eye socket, draw it out, and lance it using the two instruments as described in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut more than the superfluous that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice and speech; and after incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, you must use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is very sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And let the patient put their head on your side, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned or cautery chapter, and cover it with live water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and fill the mouth of this instrument as shown here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have a head or where one puts the medicine, as the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument above the eye with all the medicine; and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat and the blepharitis; then hold your hand above the medicine and press it against the eye, for half an hour in quantity, until you see nerves and the bites of the medicine are pacified; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument under the cotton on top of the conjunctiva; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five days. And if you need to re-start the cautery with the medicine, do so, and after the cautery wash it around the eye with cotton stuffed in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamus and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and place them easily, and cause them to boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot have the instrument covered according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And may be of silver or tin, and may one of the heads be inserted in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is numbed; after which renew often, until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things may occur; and do not do this when the abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an eggshell inside the chimney for the patient so that it is not too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh down on the mouth, and this is a good treatment overall for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is necessary to remove bone or spiny fish flesh or any other thing. Therefore, you should treat what you can see and press the tongue under the instrument towards the sun so that you see the thing move. For what does not appear and lies in the throat, you should make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance, it may be expelled by vomiting; or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread. Tie the sponge with a thread and then swallow it. When it comes to the place, it will be removed, and you can then extract it. If it does not come out as described above, take the plonging instrument in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the forceps be applied to the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head lifted high; and see that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest you hurt it or push the bone in; and move such that the patient exhales, for then he will breathe easier; if he breathes out, or if air is forced to all parts of the instrument equally, as long as it is forced.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the blood from the throat is treated with medicine as I have said in the division through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after you press his tongue with the instrument I have mentioned.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the pus, draw it out with a very small lancet, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow or shake the cane with hot air, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is thirsty all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and give it to swallow, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the pus detects the water, let it fall.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with arsenic sulfide, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the uvea; do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are glowing coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cover on top, and through that perforation place the head of the instrument; then throw the fumigation into it, and the patient put the end of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but goes to the flesh; and the blood will now fall out. And if it does not fall, you must repeat the fumigation many times; and allow the patient to be thirsty, and eat salty and dry things, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out through this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the blood, is such that when one can see it, it resembles bent tongs to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has a roughness like sandpaper, so that whatever it takes, it cannot release; and behold its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many similitudes of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two ways of which one is in its very similitude, and of that which it retains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the sores or where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the solid part, and abscesses of flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for abscesses, one must not pierce them until the bowels are dead according to their completion; and there are some that require piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them remain until they are rotten within, by chance the ligaments and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or when the abscess is from the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or when it is from the foundation, one should pierce it in the same way once it is dead; and it does not matter that you perforate an abscess that has not yet completed digestion, except for that which is from the foundation, so that it does not rot completely and become a fistula; and it cannot heal over a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of perforating the abscess that is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the reduction in pain and redness, and the swelling and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should place the perforation where more dependent upon the abscess, and where it appears to move. Let the perforation be as long as the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere else equally without any folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the living flesh, it is better to let the perforation remain until digestion is completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you perforate before that, the body will be lengthened by the venom of it, and it is full of much filth; and perchance the edges and depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that is perforated according to the size of the body, as the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it must be that you administer small punctures for small abscesses and large punctures for large abscesses, and many slits according to the size of the abscess. And for such abscesses where it is necessary to make a keyhole, cover; when it has become as hard as a grape stone and is softened, you must do so as with buboes: and for those that are slit in three angles, and for those from which one covers like the leaf of laurel, as with angry abscesses; and for those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess, it must be pierced completely; and when the abscess is large, and has formed a significant boil, if you pierce it, do not draw out all of the pus in that hour, but only part of it; then seal the abscess until the next day, and draw out some more; do this many times gradually, until all the pus exits; similarly, if the patient has weak virtue, or is a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly and decrepit individuals.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because the patient trembles several times with the discharge of the pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you will not know this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a complete incision, apply pieces of linen or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many openings, it must be that you insert a tent into each so they come against one another; and if you have cut through the skin in the abscess and sewed it up, it must be filled with old cotton or lint soaked in linseed oil, and tied for three days; then remove it, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is an evacuation of blood in your work, you apply cold water and ease the pain, and cover with soft linen, and place over the area where the blood flows repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the evacuation of blood persists, you apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have said to be used in this book, whether it is winter and the limbs or abscesses are particularly nervous, then it is necessary for you to place over tents and soft linens soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then it is necessary for you to place soft linens soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, up to the third day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess, dry it, and treat it as needed until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or come from the head small abscesses, and they are like those in fabrics, as with the fibers of a flax plant, and there are many that resemble them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and like those with moisture, similar to pulses; and there are some that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause contrary effects.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the flank are such that you test with any instrument called "intromissory," from which the form follows, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, he lets it drain from above downward.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, he cauterizes without leaving any skin on the part containing that moisture, because it repeatedly dislocates if nothing is left; then he dips cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise, in water and salt, and applies it to the wound, letting it remain until the next day; and this allows what has remained from the night to drain.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then he resumes applying the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds much fat, shape the incision according to this form, long; and cut with all your strength, and burn it from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the pus where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, do as I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and cut and treat as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut for the stony abscess and its moisture is lighter, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and these were the abscesses that I cut from an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if any had been made from it, one would have also made a wound from it like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head or cheeks, these that come from the roots of the ears, the incision should be all day at the most dependent part of the body, to allow the boil to escape; and the treatment as it should.
des scrophules	of gland swellings
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times such abscesses occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in angles, and sometimes appear elsewhere on the body, they are hard, and are joined together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each gland swelling is properly within its own cavity, like the lump and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities in these gland swellings.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see in good disposition by touch, and resemble the color of the body, and move from every part and are not raw on the neck nor near the artery nor the conduit, and are not deep; it is fitting that you cauterize from above, and scorch each part, and draw the two lips of the heart with needles if you need to, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and draw a little bit by little bit, and be sure that you do not cauterize the nerve nor the vein, and let neither spatumile, agus, nor trenching occur, so that your hand does not slip, and does not go too far, so that you do not cauterize what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you puncture the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, put vitriol powder or any other substances that staunch blood in the wound, and bind the wound; and leave it until the abscess is pacified, and the wound becomes softened, and begins to腐烂。
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the abscess is staunched, return to your work until you complete it; then rest according to your proper indication if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, and drain and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not suitable to puncture that swelling at its root. Instead, ligate it with a double strong thread, and let it fall away through it without harm. Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it further.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and draw out the force, and suture it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce it where it apertures most; and pierce it thus as the one previously said, hanging down, then apply wicks with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, continue the ointment treatment until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrophula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote of the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone perform it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have scrophula, it is necessary to cut the incision in the throat which is called "epiglote"; and if no help is sought from this, because all the veins and the tumour of the sick are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the tonsil, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It must therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglote, be cut over three or four small slits from side to side, between the two circles or according to the size of the slit made thereby; not in the cartilage; and those who are so treated are suitable for the cutting of the epiglote as there is no flesh, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched from the throat to the entire inch, then cut the skin until it comes to the vein; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then scrape the flesh as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the flow of the vein which leaps forth through the broken part, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed since there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound in the heart, and suture it thoroughly beneath the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis said that this should not be done until the throat is completely numb, and the patient is judged to be dying, and then proceed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then lift the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and for this, the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passes, and it passes in three or four days. Then they commanded to stitch and treat the wound until it is healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a damsela took the knife, and pierced her throat, and cut part of the cord from the heart; and I was called to perform the cure, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it. I knew that she had not pierced a vein nor any great artery, but the blood was coming from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, sewed the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and the damsela did not suffer from hoarseness, and returned to her normal state; for this reason I say that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess in the color of a hazel, and it is very common in women; and it occurs according to two ways: natural and accident; or naturally there is no contrivance.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs according to two ways, of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from within a vein; and there is fear, and it should not be operated on by making cuts except in those that are small, and he proves and seeks out all the intervening parts: if you find it as fatty tissue and cannot distinguish it from any vein, you incise it as one would incise fat, and draw it to all its edges, if there is any; and seek well soon, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many manners of us are, of which I will say all the likenesses; and now it is fitting that I say all the difference which is between us and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is heat and fever holding on until the ebullitions have passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	When the issue has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the syphix, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a swelling, and becomes large; and are according to two likenesses, or grease, or moist, and much of the color are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermissive," according to what its form will come or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you search for or more moist part within the abscess, and turn your two instruments little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the intermissive, and be careful lest it burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture runs clear or of any color, cut it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after extracting the intermissive no more moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so cut it crosswise, and remove it with forceps, and slightly cauterize each part. Watch where it lies, and treat the area around it soundly with the wound; and if you cannot treat it soundly, remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains nothing, it returns to us many times; and if there is a little of it, and the wound grieves, fill the wound with some corrosive powders, wet them, bind the wound, and place hot abscess-relieving things on it until it heals; and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and treat those that nourish flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beating is contrary to you or some other thing hastens it, apply the vitriol powder, and let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to the copper that which has remained from the new one.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the interposing instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Among them, there are three square ones called "albaret," and one called "breb." These too come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses from fistulas. They are like the needles used for suturing threads, made of yellow brass or iron or silver. The yellow ones are more proven for encircling corruptions from fistulas. They also come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the canine teeth are similar in appearance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and among these canines there are those with two grooves in three ways; and there are those with three grooves, also in three ways; and there are those with two grooves, and some with only one groove, all of which are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these for which they are used is the blade, and among those that cut only half the force, we cauterize the nose, because one does not puncture the vein nor the nerve; and from these are the instruments inserted into openings to prevent the patient from feeling during the incision of abscesses; and they are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses no force with them in fleshier areas such as legs, arms, mammary glands, and angles, and similar places; and sometimes another instrument is made smaller, resembling shells of almonds, according to this form, for stopping bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed once in its place where it heals by degrees from the veins, and in the arteries, and once more according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, to such an extent that they appear like women's breasts; and remain ugly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them should do so according to this form from line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then cauterize the fat, and apply the wound with medicated charcoal, then sew the two edges of the wound together, and treat it until it heals; and if the breast hangs down and becomes soft due to its size as happens in women, cut into the rib above, by similar incisions; so that one edge is attached to the other at the end of each, with the larger line containing the vagina according to this form from line .b. to the line .g.; then cauterize the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully done, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to the flow of blood, you must fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of arrow wounds
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from arrow wounds are similar to hard scrofula glands, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula glands, incise it as we have said for incisions in scrofula, and if the wound contains bowe, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sewn together, there often develop abscesses. This also happens with a swollen vein and an abscess. If you recognize it to be due to the artery, the abscesses will be large and long-formed; and when you feel it with your hand, you sense the tension; and when it is due to the vein, it appears red and protruding; and it is foolish to attempt to lance such an abscess, especially when it is beneath the ribs, armpits, and other areas, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure, and in those who are chief, it is also advisable to avoid it. In those who are swollen from an artery, make a cut above the skin long enough; then perform the incision with forceps, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is fully exposed; then insert a needle, and pierce it all the way through to the other side, and clamp the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries in the temples. Then, introduce a foreign body between the two threads so that the fluid from inside escapes, thus relieving the abscess; then apply the cure appropriate for this situation until the clamps fall off; then treat with ointment suitable for such conditions until it is healed. If the abscess is due to the incision of the vein, you should tie your hand around the area where you can grasp some of the abscess, and insert a needle from your hand into the abscess, piercing it all the way through to the other side with the double thread as I have instructed; if you are unsure that the threads will hold, you should insert another needle under the entire abscess along the incision of the first needle, and clamp the threads in three places. Then, lance the abscess until the excess fluid escapes, then treat the skin for its superfluous parts and leave what is tied; finally, place a moist cloth with wine and oil on it, and apply bandages and ointments as needed until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come to the artery and vein, abscesses of the nerves when they are injured, or through too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in joints and bones in all places where there are joints, and it is the cause of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions with pain; and when one restrains them forcefully, the patient feels great pain, and it is not just from within the body, but underneath the heart; and can be completely paralyzed, neither moving forward nor backward, neither down nor up, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron: for fear of causing contraction; those on the head or forehead cause the skin to peel at the scalp.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and incise at its base; and if it is large, suspend it by a pin, cauterize it, then extract it and stitch the wound, and continue the treatment until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No place except in the belly and nowhere else is it found, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its likeness to mushrooms, and it has fine roots and large heads; and there are both small and very large ones; and I have seen men who had two or more bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, with no difference, and were white, had fine roots, and were slightly cut, and in them there is constant moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other six [Z.], and the work in incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of subtle root; so cop it at the spatumile large, and let the cautery be at fire in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the tailor, there are often too great discharges of blood, and if the skin breaks, then you must hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made fine thread, and place it on the artelul as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the fine thread until it copes the artelul, and work thoroughly by it; and if the roots are large, you must fear to cop them immediately for the belly, but you may well cope half of them, then cauterize so that they do not return; then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cop the thelul which is of fugue color and of poor sense and with regard to milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess embedded, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a fire cautery on a wound or a cut on the syface, and is on the belly with some of the boils, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from windosity; and if it is by the rupture of the syface and by the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and obvious with various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied. When pressed at its roots, it rises and then returns. Sometimes it swells significantly upon entering the bath and due to great strain.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and clearly seen when you press with your hand; it does not constrain much. And if it is due to blood, it is clearly shown by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and inserted in a certain quantity; and if it is due to pneuma, it is swollen on touch, and the works are such that you observe whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or pneuma.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must let the treatment continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the boil, you must instruct the patient to stretch his arm and extend it straight, then lance all around the belly; then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go under the skin where you have lanced and pass through the entire length of the gush; afterwards, place half of the abscess extended above the ligature, and let your index finger rest on it; if you find it caught by the ligature, release it and return the intestine to the abdomen; and if you find the boil, take it with the needle and drain its excess; and if the artery opposes or the vein, pass directly through them, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, passing them in a cross where you made the piercing; then extract the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the skin until it rots, and excise the dead flesh by itself; or you drain it when it is fine and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and close the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture you find, then treat the skin as needed, and suture the wound.
dou chancre	of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the signs of a sore, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one should avoid the iron cure; and we say that sores often occur in the thighs, and great caution is needed in their treatment. The ancients said that when sores are on a part where they can be scraped, like those on the nipple, thigh, or similar parts, one must completely remove them when they are at the beginning; and when they are large and old, it is not advisable to approach them, for I have never seen any heal from such sores, nor have any healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when they are on a part where they can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him bleed if he has clear signs of excess, then prepare the patient for the operation by letting him lie well; then throw out the warts or sore, and the hair from all parts, and remove them completely without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press your hand or something on the part to stop any bleeding contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, so cauterize until the bleeding stops; then continue with another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the signs of dropsy in division, and how the gathering of the water is made, and the signs of each sign, and the cure by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only clarified; and one must not use iron in these two signs: namely, tympanites and hydrops, because they are mortal things; therefore when you treat this sign of dropsy called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not help, see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as sudden relief from distension and similar conditions; then do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient in good health, and he only has dropsy and is neither too thin nor too old, then proceed thus: hold the patient straight above your hands, and the attendants press the abdomen by directing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the thorny spatium according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let the point be such that it does not enter too deeply so that it cannot reach the intestines when inserted, and cannot be closed; then look to see if the hydrops is located near the intestines: in this case, you must incise above the belly three cuts directly under the knife. And if the hydrops is due to liver disease, let your cut be on the left side of the belly three cuts; and if it is due to the mesentery, let it be on the right, and it is not fitting that the patient lie on the incision so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to the weak part. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push out, and raise your hand to remove all the spatillum between the skin and the sifac as if scraping in quantity of a nail or slightly less. Then pierce the sifac until the spatillum comes to the right place, and this is the passage for the water, then draw it out, and let this instrument have the form described here.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver needle, made of light brass or iron, and placed under the part below the small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision that writers cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Above the head is the alemele, such that when the instruments come to the edge, they now go slightly above the instrument; empty it then half or a third part, for if you empty more than it should in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls senseless, or he nears death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse; then withdraw the instrument and retain the edge, and it is retained now for the cork that plugs the hole which I spoke of, that you pierce in this manner; then reapply the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw a little fluid; do this any day, and take care not to follow too much until it no longer remains but just a bit of fluid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much fluid, cure it with heat from burial earth or sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and make him drink; cure of medicines desiccative until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping up of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born who does not have pores in the urethra, or where the pores are small, or are not in their proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits him to do so quickly before he passes much very subtle mucus according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place or pierce the small lead of plumb and bind it and keep it thus three days or four and when it wants to make urine, remove the closes and let urine flow, and then put it back; and by chance it may not be necessary at all, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the wound from which the lead is pierced is small, it should be medicated with a lead clove, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the wound in their place are bledder, for none are born with the wound at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot void because the matter cannot come down to the bladder, and this is a harmful illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the patients lie often on their back, then the head of the verge and the cope are made as the size of a feather's tail, so that the perforations are each in the middle, as it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the verge
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the verge, and they are an appearance of foul flesh; and among them there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must treat them with a sharp lancet, and lance and cleanse all of them, then place soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then dress with clarifying ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and emitting pus, then you must apply a cauterization to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when you have excised it, and if the ulcer is on the verge, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is sutured, you treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, it is not assured that the head of the shoulder will not be pierced, and black rot and corruption come to the verge and wound; then you must remove all that is black and corrupt, and then bind with a plaster made from the bark of pomegranate peel and viper's flesh, and treat with other dressings until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery aids in two dispositions together: that is to say, in bleeding and in corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you insert a probe into the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when the hair is shaved at the head of the penis which comes to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then it must be that you cauterize around the base of the penis and foreskin until the ligaments are released, and release the head of the penis from all sides; and if this is a serious matter to discuss with someone, then it must be that you cauterize around a little part of the base of the penis and skin with a cautery tip; then separate thoroughly between two, and place a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water over it again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not an incision of continuity like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this work out of our own volition, and properly on infants, it is necessary that we do the best work and the most gentle for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have it only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and practitioners who performed circumcision using forceps, and with a single scalpel; they often cut too deep because there are two layers, and by accident one cuts through the upper layer and remains in contact with the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is difficult, and the pain is doubled, and in the dressing which is from without the point of the limb is not assured; and in the dressing of the nail by accident the iron escapes, and the work runs amok, and many times they arise thus without needing a dressing and I have seen it so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the dressing which is done with force on all the thread of hair I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press with your hand, you cut equally all around the entire thread; but that the hairs be very thin underneath the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child, if it hears, think that you are only loosening the hair around the shaft merely, and let him perceive in every way that you can; then hold it straight between your hands, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child cannot see, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or cough, and draw it up until the head of the shaft is fully enclosed; then dress well with the filth which has accumulated, then bind the upper signet with a double thread, then bind underneath bit by bit; and hold it on the right side at the second hour in your pocket and indicate to the right hand, and cope between the two bonds, then lift the cork quickly and draw the head of the shaft; then let the blood trickle slowly, for this is the best; and put powder over and over the powder with a piece of cloth stuck on with raw egg white, confected with rose oil well and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure with other dressings until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force for the circumcision is this: the two shoulders should be tied and sharp, and the shoulders should be as large as the hands equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in circumcision is when the corners inside go beyond the incision; therefore, you must stretch them with your finger, just as the corners are made for an abscess; and the flap equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, hold it with forceps, and then fold it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they protrude three days, and what is below the penis swells, you must leave it until the abscesses are appeased, and gently brand it; fold the flap as much as you can, and avoid the part of the penis, for it will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the head of the sudden wound from powder things, as we have said in treating powders, and if one copes too much from the heart, and it goes above, it will not harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retain the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or congealed blood, or a bow, or new flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is caused by the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, then it must be that the patient lies on his knees; and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can; and thus the necks of the bladder are constrained to the expression of the stone above, for which reason the urine is relieved. And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," of which here is its form: and let it be of fine silver, light and slender like a bird's feather; and let its handle be half a palm long, and slender at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread and tie it at the end to a bit of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess wool and fill the head of the syringe until it is full, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and wipe his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, so that it comes to the root of the penis, then cover the penis from above towards the mouth; then fill the syringe before until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel the urine coming until the thing is empty, and this is not done according to this order because the guide where it goes is crooked; then pull the thread little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it out, and make the urine flow; and refill the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied, and bind the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medicines, then make all the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; the leashes are placed so that the medicines may be well infused into the urethra to anesthetize it thoroughly. Thus, when moisture needs to be drawn out or added, place the head of the tube in the moisture, then draw it through the tract which is there; by drawing the moisture through the tube and then firmly reinserting it, the moisture will enter the tract and reach the bladder, allowing the patient to feel it. This is the form of the subtle enema used to treat the bladder: as follows:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or steel, and the head is higher; and beneath the breast where the ligaments fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you wish to clarify the bladder with inside it, then join the two breasts forming a single double thread, and heat that bit of moisture on the fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the urethra, then squeeze your hand over the bladder until all the moisture is delivered as needed, so that the patient feels the moisture has arrived in the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly through; then insert the strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles the handle, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and join it in the instrument; do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture appears in the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division the methods of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and we have said the difference between a stone forming in the bladder and all the signs, and which stone one should operate on in size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine has jumped from the bladder seeming like urine in its subtlety; and it clearly hardens, and gradually weakens the patient's vein, and pierces him many times, and then constricts; and most of these jumps are at the foundations; and the cure is lighter for children until they are four years old, and it is much more serious in older people, and is medium for those between childhood and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it must first cleanse the patient with a clyster to remove all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it obstructs at times when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and draw them out and move them into place so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and exits once from above; then have the patient sit between your prepared hands, and their hands be under their thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward; then press and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, now hasten to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not descend upon touching the entire area, soften your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is pregnant, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully formed; then place your hand on its foundation, press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press above your finger, and cut at the place where you see it should be cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upward, and remove the skin that is beneath the ribs in the part where the incision is made; then he inserts the spatule cutting, from which this is formed.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the incision between what is between the ribs and the pelvis, not in the middle but on the side of the left inguinal region; and be straight over the stone, and your two hands should be close to or near the pelvis, and make the incision so that it is wide at the front and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance, press the hand that is near the pelvis until it breaks without much effort; know that there are stones with angles and edges: they are easier to remove; and some are round like a gland, and smooth, from which the removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those who have angles and margin, make the size greater; and if it does not fit, you must clamp with tongs that are like a file at the head, to move and extract the stone so it does not escape; or you pour under the instrument a subtle curved tube at the head; and if you cannot fit it thus, you enlarge the hole a bit, and if it is uncleaned, you extract it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, you pour first the larger one into the neck of the bladder, then cover up, then pull hard, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must sew it up, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out through it so that the veins cannot be sewed up; but nevertheless strive to treat it, or break it with tongs, as you remove it piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and extract it, and place a moist cloth over it in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then reswaddle the patient for three days without unbinding the bandage.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, raise the head of the bone very well with oil and water, then treat with an ointment of defluxicon and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corruptions of blood in the bladder, and retention of urine due to these, which is known in such a manner that it moves with the urine: then pour your thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder; then wash the wound with water and oil and salt, and help it in all ways you see until it is healed; and it must be that whenever you treat these wounds, you bind both thighs and apply the medicines to the bone.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, and urine cannot pass; you should cut as I have said before, but this cutting may be excused due to the procedure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this in such a manner.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take I iron fork according to this form and fix it in the fire with three angles.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and place it around the urethra below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the fork gently into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come forth soon. Then press your hand above what remains of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken soon and jumps with urine, the patient recovers; and if you cannot do this for any reason, tie one thread under the stone and another above, then place the needle at the stone between the two threads, extract it forcefully, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often it happens that a stone is formed in women, and if this happens even once, the wound must be treated carefully, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who can disclose herself to mirrors, especially when she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that sometimes it cannot be found a woman well knowing this art by hand; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more imperfect than the man's stone, for which reason it must be made a deeper cut, and great fear arises. And if necessity demands this from those, then you must seek a well-knowing midwife, and find her among the people, and if you do not find one, at least find a very subtle substitute; and she should present a safer way in women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to perform what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then it must be that she puts forth her root and seeks the stone; and if she finds it, constrain her under her root, and recommend that she put forth her root or concomitantly with the patient, and seek and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it must be moved gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, arrange your hand where it appears, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your finger over or under the stone, and let the incision be at first small; then insert the pincers into the incision, if you feel the stone make the wound larger so that the stone can exit fully, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the vein bursts, put vitriol powder on it and hold it for an hour until the swelling subsides; then return to your work until the stone is removed, and have the tools I said in the extraction of the stone ready for those who help you with your work; and if the vein bursts, and this is from the artery that has been cut, put powder on it and bind it tightly with bandages, and do not repeat this step, and leave the stone alone and do not treat it further, lest the patient dies suddenly; then dress the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is relieved, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquouse rheum is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white vitreous humor, which is beneath the heart of the embryo, containing the egg; and it is called "vitreous humor," and sometimes it is truly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks it is another egg; and it is the skin of the embryo between the white vitreous humor as we have said; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rheum is due to weakness that comes to the embryos, and this material is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the embryos, and this moisture has many colors: it may be yellowish, or without red, or black, or white watery, and this happens more often; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white vitreous humor as we have said, it is a true abscess, though long and similar in shape to an egg, yet it does not burst the embryos, for it is moist all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, the abscess is treated with a part of the egg, and because of this, one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the quill and the white surface, one feels it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you test through the intervening square, of which the form is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intervening square, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to our power and the fullness of his body; then place the sponge on his back, on one thing somewhat high, and put a layer of wool over him; sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs of the quill of the quill. Then take the spatula flat, and scrape the skin of the quill among them long until near the blade, and make the slit entirely straight by dividing the skin of the quill up to the white part, and slightly cauterize it according to your power; then pierce the white full of water with a large perforation, and drain all the water, and then apply your pins, and raise the white upward; and do not touch the heart of the quill, but only the white; scrape everything or in pieces very finely so that if you do not scrape it well, the water will return; and if the egg has failed in your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white; then sew the two flaps of the heart of the quill with a seam, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it must be that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cauterize the ion along the entire suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the humor is gathered in two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; then cauterize the other part as you did the first equally, and wipe away the blood, and put in the wound moistened wool in rose oil; and place another moistened wool in wine and oil, and place over the two ions, and put above folded cloths, and tie it all according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and fill them with shredded wool according to this likeness and stitch them at the waistband of the trousers. One head of the shoulder is placed on the fundament down to the back, and the other to the part near the knife. The other heads are placed over the two angles, and all is stitched together in the loop of the trousers. This branch is often treated with a fire cautery instead of iron tongs, and you should use the sharp surgical cautery. Remove the skin from the ions, and heat them as we have said, so that the white fat containing the humor is revealed. Then take the cautery according to this form, and prick that white fat with the needle points, and sear it with this sharp hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And you apply the hot iron in all ways that you can, until you wither it completely; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salve; and move guards against hemorrhage, and cure the incisions; and if anything contrary to you happens, or abscesses or hemorrhages or other things, then treat what happens contrary to you according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then perform perforation as I have said. For when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that an abscess is present, make the sick person sit on a raised seat; pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the way to the large space, and place the perforation along the length of the body; let the openings be wide so that all the fluid may flow out. Then put cotton at the site and bind it, allowing the remaining fluid to drain, and treat the wound until it heals. If the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit through the opening of the wound, you must insert a pen or the instrument used to drain fluid from dropsy patients, as described before; widen the opening of the wound, and know that the fluid will return and gather after about six months or so. When it has gathered as described, then the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the roots
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	In the section of this branch there is fear in many preparations, which is why it seems to me that we should leave it as it is; and I will tell you the procedure and similar matters concerning the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from flesh, and especially from the roots; and it is by much chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to say that abscesses come from bitter and acrid superfluity, which spreads to the roots, or through percussion; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the flesh; and it does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess; and by chance it may be a painful and stony abscess, with fugitive color, and sometimes comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on both sides; and it is not fitting that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Who is made from venous swelling is known by its disposition at the expression of the touch of both sides, and can indeed cut well on this resemblance and on other marks; and you peel the core of the apple, then the seed is at the top, and the tail tough of the white soft, and release the suspender from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is hardened with these marks present, then you must incise the egg and peel it; and if it is dry at the soft part, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that taint, and peel it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the flesh is open behind, it must be cut out completely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, dress the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping that resembles a borjon, with the groin softened. The patient experiences severe pain as it changes; and the treatment for this disease is well-preserved similarly to what was mentioned before. We will detail the work for this according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It must be that you place the patient on an elevated seat, then put the suspender of the groin over your two shoulders, down to all the vessels close to the groin, and make them hold the masters tightly, stretching them thoroughly; then cut with a sharp spoon-like instrument across the vessels so they are uncovered, and then scrape from each part as we have said in the extraction of arteries in temples; then insert a needle where it has the double thread, and fix it at the first place where the vein came out, and again at another place; then sew in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures; then treat the wound as with others when you incise them, so that no vessel chievements which nourish one of the groins; for by this there is no harm, and if at all the vessels come forth veins, it must be to take out the groins from all the vessels; so that the testicles do not lose their nourishment due to incision of the vessels, dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphax
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrences of this branch are by section that comes from the rupture of the syphax, or from extension in the abdomen at the part of the ingers, for which reason the intestine descends from that rupture to one of the ilia; and this rupture is either of the syphax, or of the extension of it, and come about by these two manners of causes: by percussion, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy burden, and similar things; and the signs when it is from the extension of the syphax are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even until near the middle, for this reason that the syphax presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the ileum, that it causes a sudden onset of pain, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin, for the discharge of the intestine and the body below the ileum.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the cicatrices with the intestine are retained inquisitively, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron causing fear, for which it is advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you command or patient to retract the intestine inside the wound with his hand if it can enter; then anoint it at its root and lift the thighs. Then place the keir above, and peel all the skin from the length; then insert the leivers of the thigh uncines according to what you need to open the wound, making sure they are such that the oesophagus could issue forth; then cauterize the ileum that is beneath the skin lengthwise until the white ileum hard is discovered on all sides; then place your index finger in what follows the coccyx, between the white ileum which is beneath the skin of the egg, and between the second ileum, and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second ileum; and then move with your right hand inside the keir of the coccyx, and place the white ileum high in your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the ileum away from the spine; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release what is behind the ligament; and wait with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine enveloped or hard ileum, and if you find anything, put it back into the belly beneath; then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the rear part of the ileum, which is after the skin of the coccyx; behind the spine, then peel the heads that appear from the threads until there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and fasten the ileum, which we said was beneath the skin of the coccyx, with a strong thread of two fingers' breadth; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie firmly with two strands, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter into it, lest an abscess form; and reinsert the thread according to the first long thread, and after these two threads leave the ileum which is beneath the keir of the coccyx the size of a finger's breadth; then continue all the rest according to the roundness that the egg bears; then apply moistened wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and administer the thread as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent bleeding after incision due to doubt.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leave the thread until it draws by itself; and if it delays in falling out, it should be soaked in hot water, and then follow what we have said until it draws; then treat the wound with another dressing until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never known anyone to dare treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the wire that is wound together at the vis, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting lightly on the dislocation; then cut in half, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels constrict; and treat it as we have said until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the veins, as we have said, and the eyes become apparent; and no parts of the intestines protrude at the seams, and if they do, it is little and retracts every hour; and yet, if it remains too long in this spot, the wound or syphacul may form because the intestines protrude; and this happens due to the stretching of the syphacul that is in the veins, as we have said, for it stretches, then softens and swells the eyes and becomes apparent; and the cure is by fire cauterization, as we have previously said; and sometimes the wound is cured by iron in this manner: and it is when the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then take the eye of the rupture swollen from the large according to the size of three nails; and then extract the syphacul that is beneath the skin that follows, then take the reed and place it over the apparent eye of the syphacul; and press it well against the belly, then suture the two eyes of the syphacul above the head of the reed, and suture one and the other; then extract the head of the reed, and do not cover the syphacul nor extend the eye or any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The seam is constrained, and shows no sign in the rupture, and the cauteries are healed in this place, and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the cheeks
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the cheeks is softened in some people, because the flesh inside is softened, and it can be seen; when one wishes to treat this, the patient should lie on their back, and the softened skin should be cut from the natural skin. Then join the two edges with one缝合线，如果需要，可以用三到四针牢固地缝合超软的皮肤。之后在缝合线上切开，并像其他伤口一样处理，直到完全愈合，最后拆线。
dou chastrement	by just punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Skeith that chastremens is escomeniez in nostre loi, and for ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; and n’est necessaires fuer that por II manieres: of which the one is that li mires en saiche respondre when on li demandera, and en saiche la cure; and the other, por ceu that nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastremens is done according to two manners: either by attraction or by breaking.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the joints are softened and warm. Then hold them with your hand until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castration: it is fitting that you castrate the beast, and squeeze the sack with your left hand, then tie up the suspender, and cut above each testicle one cut, when you will have well scorched them; and I leave a little bit of soft fat which is under the vessels; and this way of castration is better than that made by attraction, for in attraction there may accidentally remain something from the sack, by which the beast desires lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to two manners in men: one is that between the two testicles it appears as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in the middle there is urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, placed above the knife as a rod and two coins.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you clean all the wounds thoroughly, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for those whose urine flows through the skin of the scrotum, they do not require any treatment.
de la tentigene	of the beard
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a wound on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is how they are treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must dye the excess of the tentigene with your hand or needle and treat it lightly; and do not overdye it too much, lest blood flow. Treat it with other remedies until it heals; and for another wound that appears at the opening of the vein, cover it and perhaps it will rupture, resembling a cow's udder, and because of this they called it in ancient times "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tumor and its treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the perforation is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident caused by illness that comes; or it is due to excess of heat, or too much or too little spiciness, and is made perfect in the thighs, or sides, or beneath, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, and childbirth, and sometimes the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these things is by the look of the urine.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are near and apparent, seek with your fingers or touch them.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a sharp syphilis and near the two flanks, hasten, and treat as follows: bring your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two flaps, so that the subtle syphilis is removed, and over the stumps; then take wool, and the fat in oil, and put it on the wound, and lie with the woman each day, so that it does not scab.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilis is hard and thick, it is necessary to scrape with a spatula resembling a bay leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stumps are of live flesh, suspend them with an oncine and scrape; and use hemostatic medicines such as acetia, dragon's blood, incense, together abundant egg whites; then administer a broad strip of lint, so that the wound does not scab; and thus keep it long, and give him another linen tent; then continue to dress until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a carbuncle brings forth pus, it should be treated according to this method, unless it is an encrusted abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an encrusted abscess in the carbuncle, one should not touch it to incise.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without cause commonly occur. And when hemorrhoids are old, they become thrombosed; and we have already mentioned the similar cases of auscultation, and the signs, and I will now say those that can receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed ones, when they are fully ripe in the carbuncle, do not appear by touch; except those cured with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the sore, which one can feel, are those one can treat.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then put the altelul in the tongs, and the copa in its roots, then sprinkle medicines that restrain blood, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding continues, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate peel and garlic and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and garlic, and apply a plaster to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, if you cause it to draw suction cups on the back and breasts without piercing; then take wool, and mix in grease with juice of plantain or of agnus castus with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it must be treated as I have said for the thigh; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the arm, such as chancre, porous abscess, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must say in this treatise on the hot abscess that comes from the arm, which is not one of those abscesses that swell suddenly; and if you wish to know the procedure, observe whether the abscess has begun its appearance, and is full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it but let it die until the pain is appeased; and then place the patient on a seat, and have two small seats or stools for him to recline, and support his back and align his feet with the parts below the leg; and spread his thighs, and place his arms beneath his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then apply the bale from the right side, and lead it to the instrument used for the mouth of the arm, of which we will speak later in form; and it must be that when you see this instrument being applied, you insert the probe first to know the depth of the arm, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it must cover the depth of the arm with cloths, so that the instrument does not weigh on him; and it must place the horn of the instrument above, and test the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened, and one makes it soft by hand, it must be covered at the head, at the spatillum light; and when the bow [pus] is evacuated, you must put in the wound moistened cloths in rose oil, or in green vitriol oil; and place the cloth out of the wound on the margin of the sore, and put above the sore and above the blade clean moistened linen in water or honey be cooked; then cure after two days anointing suitable for this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the sore and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and long pepper be cooked; then return to the anointing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed on the margin, you must take care to avoid cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mestier is first in labor when she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman push avidly, and desire to breathe: then hasten the birth of the child; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and comes headfirst with the second coming after it; and when you see these signs, you should gently press her abdomen, so that the child comes out quickly; for when he descends on his head, the second follows after it, and is cleansed of its impurities by good cleansing. And who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For he comes sometimes on his feet, and comes forth into the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where he comes on her abdomen, or side, and is turned by chance over his neck, and in other bad figures; it is necessary for labor that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes upon his head through natural birth, and the woman delivers easily, and the virtue of her is weak, then let it sit on a saddle, or where women hold it; and arise from its nature, oil or fenugreek being cooked, then pour the balm between its two little spatumiles as they are formed.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the second nerve, and let it lie until the moisture that is within comes out; and press her abdomen so that the child descends. If it does not descend, then clisterize the woman with fenugreek muscilage and safflower oil. Then make her drink and sneeze of condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands emerge broken, you must gently reduce them little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on the seat, and lift her feet up high; then remove the seat from the ground, and support the woman so she does not scream during the reduction; and if the hands cannot be reduced and the child dies, cut off the hands with the knife that is mentioned before, and extract the child, reducing them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child at his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes at his feet, you must lift him up; and then turn him little by little until he is equal; then take his feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to the hips, then command him to hold back, and make him sneeze by tickling his nose; if it is feverish, let God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not feverish as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come to fever as we have said, take musk of almond, oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar; then put the nature of the woman inside and above this ointment, and let her sit in warm water until below the ribs; when she is softened below, give her myrrh to wear, and place it under her, and let her have it for an hour; then let her sit on the stool, and tickle her nose and mouth, and gently rub her abdomen, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue from the child above his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, put your hands gently on him little by little; then rub his neck, and let his feet hang down, and lie him on the bed; bend his hands little by little, and then place his hands over his abdomen, removing the cushions beneath until he is supported below; and if the child does not move, take his feet and shape them firmly, then raise his abdomen upwards, and put your hands in; and lift the child little by little; and command the woman to hold on tightly until the child passes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes with one hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must devise to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, make the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her on the bed and prop up her legs firmly; then apply the ligature as I have recounted; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study to bring back the hand; and take the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to grip until the infant is forced out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I must have the child grasp its hand, then turn it little by little, and gently; and when it is equal, place on the natural ligature of vein and oil as we have said, then command her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grip; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner for all the secondine, cut the secondine with your finger until the moisture is evacuated; and if the infant can fit on its face and on its neck, cut from the mouth, so that it is not retained, and kill the infant; then put the child inside, as much as you have placed it, and instruct the woman to bear it only once: then gently extract it.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins often are born, and sometimes three or four are born; this is not an uncommon thing, and it rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are extracted things, and do not live much, if at all; I know them, that they be multiplied, and are devised by the syphilis which is linked to the bowels; and sometimes issued also naturally like unto worms, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue smoothly, the treatment as we have said, and let the bile subtle flow quickly and easily; do so as it benefits for healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it should be that the bile know all this, for similar things may happen; do so according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the mother of the dead child or her womb as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you are forced to perform manual work; then you must know if the woman is healthy and has no accidents or fear of death. She should be soothed on her back, with her head inclined forward, and her legs raised. The minister should place her hands on two parts, tying her to the bed such that she is not moved for the descent of the child. Then, rub her mouth with moist oils mixed with muscilage of althea and fenugreek, and linseed oil. Anoint her hands with these oils and muscilages lightly, then place the palms in the mortar where you have prepared the oncin. Ensure that the child is positioned to descend onto its head; if the descent is through the feet, insert the oncin or a pin along the mid-back. The oncin should be placed in her right hand, and she should hold it between her left index finger and thumb. She should gently place this in any of the areas we have mentioned until it reaches an empty space; this is the form of the oncin.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then prick against the other pin, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal; and then stretch equally by moving back and forth, to allow issuance, and let the pins have teeth to hold them, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, and he wags any of his eyes, and places them in that part, and draws out the other part; and if there remains nothing, then set this pin or higher up, and do this until it is all drawn out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until it is all drawn out; then bind it at the joint of the sole or on the cut, and do this likewise for the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and the birth canal is narrow, or it has a sharp obstruction, you must place the spineless spatumile between your hands, make an incision in the head, and extract the sharp obstruction; or you can use a tool called "almidach", which comes with the instruments or chapter after this one; and then similarly, let the child have a large natural head; and then pull the bones out with forceps, and if the head must be cut, do so to the extent that the obstructions are released; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the back, you must pierce it until the obstructions flow.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is under its feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the birth canal is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is narrow in the belly or at the nipple, it must be extracted with a flytrap enveloped on the hand; and make the belly or the nipple as wide as the moist substance that is present; and if the other limb has been removed, and the head remains, he should apply honey to its palm thoroughly; then he should cut up to the mouth of the honey; afterwards, he should pour in one or two ounces, and pull out; and if the mouth of the honey has become narrow due to a hot abscess that has come there, it is not fitting to work on it, but it must be given moist and greasy things; and he should apply plasters, and a compress in water softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the injury is on his side, and you can set it equal, apply what we have said for the living child; and if one has no power, cut out with forceps piece by piece, and leave nothing of the secondine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the one that we said comes to be in the abscesses that come from the gums; and if bleeding occurs, it should be put in cold water restraining, and give him other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then I sutured the other [one] over it, and prevented the death of the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the mouth, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought long about it, and could not staunch the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster with strong吸引力，从中取出了一块骨头，之后几天又取出了其他一些。
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled much, for the belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found bones there, as the woman improved significantly; and the woman lay long thus, with a bit of blood from the vein; and I did not remember this chapter for the reason that when masters find an unfamiliar thing, they must know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After that comes the form of the presser, to which one writes in the books; and twice around the two heads of the bones.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In every way, the horns should be more subtle from the restrictoire, and made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth of the fust be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one palm and a half long; in between the two limbs there should be two attachments of this same wood, firmly set in each, half a palm or a bit longer in length; and these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the maris to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of pliers; and let it have two heads, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the maris with all the instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread, then insert the two attachments together into the maris, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the pliers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the maris until the hinge does what it wills.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely mounted, and its images are multiplied; and when the user has them prepared, it is more rapid in its work, and higher for men due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not use the instrument properly unless it is prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it must be instructed to grip her abdomen, and then cause her to sneeze gently. And if she passes it through this means, well and good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not work, take a spoon or cover and put herbs that can open the mouth of the child inside, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cayenne, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or steeped in water on fire. Then place one end of the spoon or cover in the mouth of the child, and hold it until the vapors enter the child's mouth; then cause her to sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not able to be moved, command the maid to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or muscilagin of althea, then put the bottle back in nature, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, take it and extend it little by little straight, so that the tendons do not chafe at the extraction; but she must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw; it will come and be disengaged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the tendon is tightly chafed, we have said the treatment for sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, then guard that you do not proceed rashly in drawing; but it must be that what is at the mouth of the tendon, that you bind it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with a tetrapharmcon ointment enema; she will take it and put it back, and it will become able to move. But still, when she takes it, if it produces an不良气味 to the stomach and head, and causes the patient discomfort.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If therefore suitable fumigations are required for this: some of the ancients have proven the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass resembling a cane, and one places the fine end in the nature, and the wide heads above the fire; and let the fumigations be upon the coals, and the scab until it is corroded, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but have a softened one with a syfac: therefore it is necessary for the baile to pierce that syfac in the right place, and not the spatumile itself sharply, and guard the lacement so that she does not touch it; then place upon moistened wool in wine and oil, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not close, put or hold a plug of lint, and let it remain in place, and be removed when the child seems ready to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this plug comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be handled suddenly: if it needs to be treated, as we have said for the lint plug.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodules, and grow larger than those that come from leakage of the fundament or in the space between two parts, resulting in one fistula or multiple; and when this nodule is old, it works, and often contains moisture, a white or fine pus, and sometimes these fistulas are Persian; they are known by those who have them through evacuation or windiness when the patient evacuates, and by chance during a passing of wind.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they reach fistulas to the bladder, and to the half of the penis; and reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula penetrating to the fundament, and not penetrating: and it is that you place your index finger in the fistula, and insert a fine needle of steel or iron when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a fine probe of linen, or horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge from the fistula nor windiness nor flatulence as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; so hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced to the bladder or to the urethra, it will discharge urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And if it is pierced to the hip joint, the tent will come just to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain in between, then it is such that it returns to its place, and neither medicine nor immediate healing by ointment is worth anything; and in these pierced fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of foolish practitioners who undertake them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	And in that which is neither pierced nor ancient, for hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on his back; and the servant lifts the legs up to his hips, and bends his hips toward his belly; then set a tent of iron or of ploughshare if there is tortuosity, as much as you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep within the buttocks, you must place your index finger there; if you then feel that the vein has been pierced, know that it is a vein; do not work on it much as it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can treat well with aid only some cases, but this happens rarely; the help that one applies, consists in heating the cautery to a subtle degree according to the size of the fistula, as was previously said; and you insert it hot into the fistula until it comes from the buttocks; do this two or three times, until you know that the threads are thoroughly burned, which resemble bird feathers; then dress with wet cloths in butter until the threads have come out, then dress with ointment, healing the flesh and closing the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus set, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus set, otherwise it cannot be set. And if the arrowhead is between and does not penetrate just to the root which is the foundation, and you place a thick covering of flesh or sponge between your finger and the arrowhead, and you see the fistula at the part where the covering is taken off; scrape from the beginning of the fistula, and apply something before the arrowhead, and cauterize after it until it reaches the tip of the arrowhead; then the arrowhead will be delivered and fall out. Then clean those flesh parts that seem like a bird's feather, leaving none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the seton fails and cuts between you and the wound, cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries bring together two good things: that is to say, the burning of these wounds, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture; then treat the wound with ointments soothing hard flesh, and are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is sound and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just to the point of the fundament and is distant from the body, touch or place your finger at the fundament, and inquire it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the wound and between them is cloth or syphage or wounds, and it is about to pierce through, if there be no way of hope and expectation, by administering one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can, put ointments and treat as first; and do not go too close to the point of piercing, lest you cut the tissue that holds the fundament, and cause the discharges by its own will; then treat as we have said; by chance it may be healed, or you remove that covering and clean since it is cut from beneath the fundament with a tent or other pointed instrument; then cleanse the necessary flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and to arrest the fistula above the fundament: this will be a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are treated in this manner: and it is when you poke the tent into the fistula, and it is located near the base beneath the skin, so take a perforated tent from the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you poke the thread into two turns, and push the tent onto all the thread in the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perianthic near the margin of the base inside, then extract the thread from that perforated one, as you poke your finger or base; and pull the tip of the thread, and join the two heads together, and hold them against each other, and let them be for one or two days; and hold them only once, until the threads close the gaps between them completely; then treat the wound until it is healed and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it perforate in all ways that you can, provided it is not too close to the surface.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature if too close to the surface, and then treat, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spatumile spine from which the fistula is made is very jagged on one side and sharp; and on the other side not so much, because what should not be cauterized should not be cauterized, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways: some are within the rectum, like grains of resin, and they can be small or large, often accompanied by blood, with one or more; they are outside the rectum and at the anus. But those outside have little moisture and only a slight amount of yellowish water or blood, maintaining the color of the body. For those within the rectum, instruct the patient to lie down to allow them to drain into the chambers until the rectum is emptied and the threads are visible; if necessary, use tweezers or your fingernail to remove them, then cauterize at their roots. If the rectum cannot expel them, apply a strong and bitter suppository to wash out what remains in the rectum, allowing it to drain clearly. When the patient presents, and the threads are severed from the rectum, the treatment is mild; you can remove them with your fingernail or tweezers, then cauterize as previously described until they are healed and prevent incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you need to administer the suturing according to this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it through an awl, then draw the thread over and pierce the awl from the other side, and turn the two heads of the thread under the awl, and so make them even; tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, withdraw the awl, and do thus with all others, leaving one to drain the excess blood; then place upon the foundation a moist cloth in oil of roses or cerote, place it upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and let him lie until he convalesce, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other care until he is sane.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of dry the wound or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is a sudden drying up of bile in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must reset it at the point of a spatule or your nail, which does not leave moisture; then cure it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot dry, you must begin the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals and becomes scalded; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formice is a small false appearance on the body, and goes away very quickly. And sometimes one finds it cold, and feels like being dead from trembling, and it comes throughout the body, more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a needle from a goose feather, or a very strong vulture feather, and place that needle on the tremor, so that the purple circles completely surround it; then turn your hand around the entire needle so that you cover the tremor entirely, and put it perfectly, and root out the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do it with a needle of spider silk or iron according to this form, and make it thin underneath and drawing on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for you must hold with the two fingers and press. And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the shoulder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Any time the shoulder is dislocated, it is done with a silver, arched, molten iron, or chain; and at any time these instruments are small or large, according to those for whom they are used.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the breasts are tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it should have an opening or the breasts should be tied as you see fit, and the head should be pierced through; it should have two holes on one side and one on the other; and place the medicines inside using a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it completely with small holes, placing one digit of space between each hole. Then insert a strong thread made from boiled linen yarn twisted ten times or so into these holes, and sew up the breasts as if they were a goat’s head; when the medicine is inside, tie it tightly with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then set it in place; this is the shape of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it lightly. Then, the attendants withdraw their hands together as much as it is all clear, then extract the clyster, and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine seems to come out, so let it run forth as much as it can; and if he sleeps all night, it will be greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clysterize for a disease of bowel discharge, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it as much as he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are internal or a boil, then let the clyster be as subtle as for an infant; and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin is compressed.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will discuss the treatments for hands and medicines according to the fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the joints or parts where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and sword or knife cuts, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the joints of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple wounds of the head, because their chapter will come later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a chief, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone blow or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound great, and you slightly doubt an abscess hot: so do it soon sanguineous of the cephalic immediately if little blood comes from the wound, and let the sainie on the contrary part of the broken.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it will not sanguineous, so let its flesh be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat; and place on the wound, if hot abscesses come, only wet cotton in rose oil, or in stipitate wine; and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh to all its blood, and it has not dried by air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if the fire has dried it, place on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by stretching, sew them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, concerning stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and hangs loose, and can be held only with difficulty, bind it; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat solid meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, like eggs, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find decayed skin and it does not reach the bone, bind all the decay, apply fire, then treat it. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be staunched without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, tie the artery with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: it is that you apply this powder which binds as though the arsenic had acted upon it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live wax three parts, and make a fine powder, and apply it to the wound, and hold it tightly in place until it dries well and joins all its blood; and then dress it well, and leave it undisturbed if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with wax alone, when one does not have incense nor the dragon's blood, but lets the arsenic act upon the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the surgeon has already applied a powder to the wound while it was still fresh, he should not put this powder there; but apply some digested ointments, or pulses made from oat flour mixed with water and honey until they emit heat; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about the fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other means than to let the cure proceed, and put nothing restraining on them, for it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation from those lies with the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicines over them, such as washed wax in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and boiled flax washed in the same sweet water, and other mines according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, suture and bind it with bandages, then let the wound heal.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and infected with bowels, pierce or open them lower down; and if an artery is cut, and bleeding continues, suture and ligate it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spinal cord of the throat is cut, or the nerves, and the duct through which flesh flows is guarded, so that flesh does not enter, sew the nerve above the vocal cords but do not touch the throat, placing it according to its natural figure; then restrain it properly, and let it remain for a few days, then cure with drying ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, set it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, and leave the rest until the wound rots, and the discharge is removed; and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or刀伤
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or sword, and the wound is deep, examine whether from the wound there are signs of immediate death: then you know that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put in powder at the first hour nor leave it open for the blood that may coagulate and enter the heart, and kill the patient; but apply a attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to drain out the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so there will come no spasm, nor evil tremor of the heart, nor severe pain; and when you see good disposition, then you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure then from sores and other treatments, until he is healed; and if she cannot heal, operate, and you know that there is a fistula; treat her as we should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat what is in front; if it is large, sew it; and if it is small, dress it with powder; and if it is close to the bone and has cut pieces, let the wound heal, and remove any foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, leave the wound to drain, which will facilitate the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	for the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; from such a large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines are exposed, by which there is an introduction of foreign objects; and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one, because we cannot put the intestines back in place without heat; for when the intestines swell soon upon feeling cold, they return to their original positions, and thus a medium-sized wound is better, as we warm the intestines to their proper places. And know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways: the two common sutures happen at the abdominal suture, and the sutures of other wounds on the body are also common; but they are more appropriate with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and no intestinal matter is present, and it is easy to close, this can be done by one of two methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, heat it in a proper manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth with warm water only, or you can boil it in water with cinnamon and cipres and spice, and wash the intestine until the swelling is removed; and once this has been done, let it cool so that it may be applied to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or with boiled and cooked mallows, for by these it becomes easier to introduce into the body a small amount; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and let the first cure be made when the cutting is finished, as there should not be much cutting unless necessary; and this is the tool for making the incision: so cut inward along the curve and do not deviate, and here is its form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has protruded, replace it rearward according to its natural form in its proper place if you have the ability, for this requires movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the area below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the area above the abdomen, you should raise his head and hips higher than the parts below, and likewise if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two halves, you should place things such that the severed part is higher than the other; and thus you should administer as I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And for small wounds, use what is provided to you. Then have at hand the minister of pine resin that can seal the entire rupture with its sap; and close the lips together; this is the common method of suturing, and it involves threading a needle or more, according to the width of the wound. Leave a space of about an inch from the head of the wound, and insert one needle with strong, thick thread; pierce both sides of the skin with two needles placed beneath the inner layer, making sure to pierce through that part, and bring the two ends of the siphac together in a knot. Then pass the thread twice around the needle from both sides, and close the wound by bringing the edges of the skin and siphac together appropriately. Leave a space of about an inch, and insert another needle; then follow the same procedure as with the first needle until the entire wound is closed. Use needles that are medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, because very fine needles can tear through all the flesh, and very thick ones may not enter well: thus, they should be of moderate size. Do not insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin to avoid tearing and reopening the wound before suturing is complete; then remove the tips of the needles so that they do not irritate the patient while sleeping, and place small cloths or gauze over the needle points for easy removal, leaving them until the wound heals. This method of suturing with needles is more suitable for smaller wounds, as one needle suffices for a second suture; it involves bringing together both sides of the skin and siphac on a single needle with moderate thread. When you have pierced all four ends together, withdraw the needle to the part where you began, following the manner in which we join fabrics. Leave a space between each stitch equal to about an inch and a half; this type of suture is effective, and I once sewed a wound from a man's abdomen that was cut by a knife, measuring more than a palm in length, with intestines protruding two palms, located within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I cured it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and placed clean cotton twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and thread it from the outside into the inside; when it has pierced through the heart straight on, leave the end of the siphon or seam where you have threaded the needle, and pierce it again from the inside out. The understanding of this stitch is that you sew as a leatherworker would sew leather, leaving the siphon once on one side and then the other, until the entire suture is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen precisely describes, is such that any person does it by assembling the two parts naturally and applying one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner: insert a needle or end of the thread near, and make a single piercing through that side, leaving the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle, and make a piercing from the outer part to the inner part, at the two ends of the thread; and this is the best method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and anyone testifies, that one should suture the belly with two needles, or it has thread in each; and one must thrust one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds. And know that when the tear is within the belly, the suturing is more grievous than on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as the surgeon has drawn out, you set back the intestines, and the gut. Then put on powder to encourage flesh growth, and if the surgeon has drawn out, you put on any ointment that is present until the wound heals; and stitch the flaps, and bind the cheeks, and the groin; then treat the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, you put on old cotton soon as it begins to exude fluid, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of other medicine in many conditions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members, it is fitting that you moisten fine linen in tempered warm oil, or in rose oil, and put it between the layers, and under the edges; and if there is pain or suppuration in boils, and often happens, use black wine enemas, especially if the suppuration comes to the intestines; and perforate from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the problem of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the head of the thighbone jumps out of the wound, reset it behind as with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned to red or black, then you must ligate the vein that is black, to prevent blood from flowing, because there are veins and arteries there; then remove what is between the ligation, and place both heads over the part below the wound to the front for easier extraction when the thighbones fall out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the vein
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some individuals, for I have seen men who were pierced by a lance, either on the right side of the stomach; the wound became walled off and turned into a fistula, through which excretions and wind passed; I treated it as best as I could, and continued to carefully tend to it until it healed, binding the edges.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it heal, I doubted whether the patient had pain in his stomach. There was no such pain, but he improved and ate and drank well. Some surgeons said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: take thread of large needles, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it between the two edges so that it closes the mouth; then bind the head, and it will hold so that it cannot be untied. Then put another thread after in the same manner as before until the wound is completely closed, and leave the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief burns in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, one can sew the intestine with a thin thread made from the intestine of an animal: take the head of this thread of intestine that is most undehairered, then tie at the head of this thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread on the needle, and suture the intestine, and tighten at the wound; and this method of suturing for a tremor does not differ from the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the larger intestines, there is nothing that can be known, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula," and especially when it is closed and round.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it is also very thin like a bird's feather; sometimes clear hollow, and at other times thick; sometimes small, and at other times large; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and there is no flesh, can only be discharged through one of the nine causes: namely, by the little amount of blood or flesh; or for its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, and above the edges, that does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the bones are rotten, and the matter has a bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment is not good; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or due to the nature of the region where digestion is delayed and health is slow, and naturally swollen; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the treatments with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it must be that I shall teach you the treatment of an abscess caused by manual intervention.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that an abscess can occur in all parts of the body; for there are abscesses that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the liver, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spinal column, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and so it affects the principal part of the limb, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all abscesses of this nature are a serious concern for health, and there is no cure except labor and ignorance; and if there is any abscess that does not come from the veins or arteries as I have said, and you have confidence in its treatment and can recognize it, take a thin tent of wire or iron, if the abscess is straight, hold it steady; and if the abscess is curved, use a fine, flexible tent made of plonc, because the plonc can bend around the curve. And if the abscess has openings and you cannot thoroughly examine it with tents, irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture spreads from one opening to another and cleanses it; then hold it firmly so that you can determine whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is fully drained, and ask the patient where he feels pain when pressed, and where exactly. And when you truly know its location, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, as I have told you, then treat it according to what I have said, removing any foreign matter and decayed flesh inside; and continue the treatment until it is healed. If the abscess is deeply embedded in a straight line, you must thoroughly drain it as much as possible, then place wet tents soaked in medicinal water around it, letting them fill up to the top of the abscess, so that the medicine can erode any remaining excess from within; and afterward apply healing ointments until it is fully healed; if it does not heal through this method, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is decayed due to the abscess, then treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve is not damaged or the principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the king (healing) be performed until all the corruption is removed, then cure the matters affecting flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and return to bowing as before, know that you have not yet gone far enough: so uncover and rest until you are at the core, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot remedy it; and there is no other means but to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can remove it with tongs, extract it with an appropriate instrument; and if there are many bones, remove them all, and do not leave any one. And if moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, cut the flesh and bone, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something corrosive on the wound to rot it, and leave it until the flesh is rotten beneath the bone, then the bones will be lighter; and if it is a large bone, such as in the thigh or leg, reset only the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound; and if there is much of the corrupted part, coming close to the marrow of the bone; you must excise and cauterize everything up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is set; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around XXX years of age, who had pain in his leg due to a cause within the body. The materials came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess. There was no way to drain it; but the people, out of their folly, opened it excessively so that much material drained, and it became a fistula. Many cavities appeared that continuously discharged pus and moisture from the body. For more than two years, many people treated it, and there was no wise man in the art of the hand until I was called; and I saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, and what drained through the cavities was a large amount of pus. The body of the young man turned red, and had an amber color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one went against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and cut into one of the openings enough to discover a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, with corruption extending into the bone within; I saw what appeared from the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption, being only what I removed; and began to restore the wound with medicines for a long time, but could not缝合；随后又开始了，再次切开骨头如前所述，发现腐败延伸至骨内，并处理了腐败部分，然后用药物恢复伤口；它迅速痊愈并缝合，不再需要重新开始这项工作，除了病人因虚弱无法忍受以及我对他的死亡恐惧。
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often there is bloodletting due to evacuation, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard scar, and it was well positioned and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a ligature, and stretch it at the end of the bone that protrudes, and order someone to extend it upwards; put another ligature of wool, larger than the first ligature, over the scar above the bone, and tie the ends so that you pull the corrupted flesh away from beneath, and uncover the flesh above the place where you wish to set it, that the bone does not bleach the flesh; and place a hot coal or a board under the bone to cook the corrupted flesh; and must continue to do so as long as corruption can be seen and felt, and do so again at another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then place a hot coal underneath, and afterward stretch from one part to the other the corruption, and let the soother be as long as the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and the bone on the other side that contains it; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no old one but to copper; and if the corruption is where a knife from the hand or foot strikes, this thing is very strong, but still you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears; and cleanse in all ways that you can, but let not the vein or nerve hinder you; know that the incisor and tendons for copping these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and because of this, it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each semblance of work; and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the evidence of the signs of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder dislocates either internally or externally; and when you have treated the corrosion with medicinal care and it does not improve, you must cut that member until you reach the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater malice of the member's defect; and the signs are that the member turns black, seeming as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption of the member spreads to another member and takes over the entire body; so hasten to cut, and if it is due to the sting of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion, viper, and similar, and the corrosion is on the head of the arm, then cut, and do not give it time to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes just to the hand, cover at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come just to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut with the knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there are no means of remedy except for the quantity of its virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes in the first joint, cover after the other joint; and if it comes or pierces, cover all the pierced area; and if it rises in the leg, cover at the joint near the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means but to let the patient die; and the manner of covering or sewing the limb is that you tie over and under, extend some ministers below, and some others above, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties as wide as a span, until the bone is revealed; then cover or sew, and place a linen bandage from each side, so that the sinew does not touch the healthy flesh, and brings another lesion and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the flow of blood comes when you work, cautery the limb hastily, or place some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, and bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a certain man: he had a blackness that seemed like a burning fire, and this corrosion came first on his toe of his foot, so as to encompass all the foot; and when the doctors saw the corrosion, they hastened to cauterize the foot, and it healed. Soon after, the corrosion returned on his hand's thumb, and he came to me, and I placed reflective things after cleansing the body, but the corrosion did not cease; and he asked that I amputate his hand, but I would not, as I had hope of reflecting the matter; and I doubted also that if I were to cut his hand, he would die, for the virtue of man was weak; and he despaired altogether and returned to his land, and hastened to cauterize his hand, and it healed; and I do not recount this story except in case one needs another, if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess occurs in the flesh, and remains so long that it gathers a great amount of pus; then it bursts and drains, and the pus leaps out, and the bones remain visible, as if they were vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as fine thread, and does not reach to the bone or to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so long that it reaches the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you peel away all of this skin, especially when it is delicate, as fine thread; and does not rupture for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have reason to believe that the skin will rot and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, cure it with a clyster thus: look whether the abscess is large, and the pus within has a foul smell, then prepare an Egyptian medicine in this manner: take aloe, oil, and litharge equally, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey; then take of it according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and administer the clyster to the side, and hold the puncture. Leave the medicine on for two hours, then drain it out carefully; do this many times until the abscess is drained and the foulness removed; and if such medicine is not present, you can use ash water, taking vineyard ashes, pour water over them, leach it, and administer as a clyster, until you know that the side is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear this Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, you can prepare a clyster with water and honey, adding some litharge; or use honey and wine mixed, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine causes the abscess to rupture; and when you have done this, and you believe that the side is well cleansed, administer a clyster that produces flesh in it, using plaster of Paris, mixing it with rose oil and wine; or use some medicines and ointments, about which I have said their properties, treating them accordingly; and if the opening of the abscess is small and the clyster cannot enter, you can slightly enlarge it with a metal instrument, and place on a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too wide, you should sew it up so that only enough space remains for the clyster to enter, and if the opening where pus flows is above, you should cover it more below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the wound is perfect, do not allow flesh to fill it in; and if you cannot sew the skin as you see fit, prepare it in such a manner that the bow (thread) runs to the lowest part of the skin where it is, for when the wound is perfect, do not allow flesh to fill it in and if you cannot stitch the skin as you see fit, prepare it in such a manner: that the bow runs gently downward, and leave nothing of the thread; and take consolidative medicines to place over the healthy part, and keep them under a linen drape that covers all the healthy part; then sew with force toward the hole of the breast a bit larger than the first, for there is ointment souef on the other drape according to the size of the hole, and put it on the hole of the wound to ease the bow, and do not remove the large drape outside until after many days once; and that which is under the hole of the breast, often remove to take out the bow, and know what comes from the bow, if it be venom or little or enough, or digested or undigested; and keep watch lest the patient feel pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in such a manner and you see the nature that comes up on the hole of the wound, know that the breasts have already swollen, and approach health; and then release the wound in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast expels an undigested bowel after many days, know that the breast does not become hardened.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose wounds heal slowly with much effort, and of those who do the opposite; and if an undigested bowel suddenly appears from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not become hardened; and if the breast heals slowly and is distant, apply drying medicines to its substance and to its virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take a diaphoretic ointment, make it with rose oil, and infuse it with old wine equal in quantity; then heat and use it; and if such an ointment is not available, cook honey thickened, and use it when needed; and mix myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them on honey when it is on the fire, and wrap them in a cloth, place them on the breast, and sometimes administer long pepper and roots of celestial lilies, which are as fine as flour of coriander and centaurium; and use simples or compound medicines: grind them, make powder, and put it on the honey as I have said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, know that the corruption is deep and affects the bone, or hard members, or ligaments; so treat the fistula from the cure, as we said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Painarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or foot, or by chance arises in other toes; and when it matures and one does not take care of it, it comes to a full-blown abscess, spreading and discharging pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance even the whole nail; and brings corrosion up to the bone, causing painful swelling of the finger, and the color turns foul.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the wound does not heal, then you must cut away all the remaining superfluous tissue from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are much great help if the bone is sound and the nail is whole; and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick, and the blisters, then you must put a rag under the nail so as not to prick the flesh, and let it rise up, and peel that subtle and gently, and place over the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must peel it and draw forth forcefully, for as long as the bone is decayed, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone decayed, you must peel it according to what was previously said, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is injured and swollen, and it feels great pain, you must first heal it; then peel the nail with a sharp spatula by cutting across, and watch that the cuts do not come up to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain; and if this happens, place something above it that will soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the sore came from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	the dislocation that arises in some men by accident is either all fleshy, and sometimes has a tear or it has bones, and once it has a nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some knuckle.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	That which arises in any knuckle of the thumb does not move, and that which arises at the joint of the thumb may sometimes move; the size of that which is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad blade.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which arises at the root of the joint is grievous to treat: so hold it with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate blade, and cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come together in this way come from birth, or suddenly from a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut this wound so that it heals according to its natural form; then place between two moist cloths or pieces of wool soaked in rose oil, to prevent them from healing too quickly; or you place between two thin pieces of linen, until the edges are properly joined.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the wound comes together with one of these two using the palm, cut this wound as is fitting.
des vils	of the wretched
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	of the veins swollen enveloped full of excessive melancholic humours, which come from many members of the body; and more occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer to him once an evacuation of black bile, and then cure him with the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron cure is performed in two ways: one is by cutting and draining the black blood; and the other way is to open the vein and draw all the black blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is performed in this manner: first, immerse the leg in very hot spring water until the flesh becomes tender. Then, scrape the limb of the patient from below the knee to the part just above the knee; next, make a cut in the vein at one point, or two, or three, with a wide incision. Lift and drain the black blood by hand from one end to the other, until as much blood flows as the patient can tolerate. Then close the wound and instruct the patient to rub it with meat juices rich in black bile; and repeat the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The application of the leeches is done in this manner: hold the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with warm water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it on fire, and place a cloth over the vein from the ankle to the top of the knee, or below the ankle; then cut the skin at an inch, and cauterize the vein from each side until it appears when touched; and it will appear red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then place leeches under it until it rises from the skin, and then let it down to an inch, then place another cloth above three fingers; then cauterize the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the leach as you did before, and let it down to another inch, so as you did first; then cut a different size, or more if needed, then lift it, and cut at the toe part, then draw and lift until it reaches the second size; then draw from size to size until it is all drawn out, then cut it; and if you cannot draw and lift it, place a needle with a strong double thread under it, and tie and pull, and place leeches over it, and turn your hand in one direction and another until it comes out; and beware that it does not stick, for if it sticks, you cannot draw nor lift it, and it will be harmful to the patient; and when you have drawn all of it, put wet wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the site of the wound, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not clip it; and draw it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron with which one clips the vein is curved, and one does not cut, but only clips the vein; and it is of large curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but as we have said, it should be large.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is inserted in limbs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may arise elsewhere than in limbs, and this happens from putrefaction that comes from under the skin, as serpents and worms do, inserting themselves between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then change the eyes, and begin the vein to issue forth, as one root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder opens, it must be wrapped with a piece of lint about one and a half inches to two inches wide, and the wick, and let the lint hang over the leg, and every time there is no point on the outside, wrap the area again with the lint and wick; if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining with it, but do not cut at its root until it is completely issued; for if you cut it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess, putrefaction, or swelling; because of this, it must be treated little by little until the entire length is issued; there have been cases where this vein, when treated from five inches to ten inches in length, or a man who had one issue from ten inches in length, and when you cut it, pour one drachm or puncture, and pierce it thoroughly so that all of it issues out; let the matter inside be drained, and apply anti-pus medicines for several days, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes from this vein many pains, and especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or hand, and there comes much bruising, and where veins burst; treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers which arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm which arises between skin and flesh, and travels up and down throughout the body, feeling well as it goes from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and bursts forth; and it is engendered by putrefaction of certain humors, as come from serpents and worms and ascarides or intestines; and doubt arises about its malice, for when it travels through the body and climbs to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn, one cannot force it as it goes: therefore, you must tie the vein above and below with a strong thread tightly, then cut and draw it out. If the fluid is completely drained from the flesh, and you do not find any, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greater harm it does is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the eye, hold strongly beneath it, then cut and draw it out. The patient must use cleansing of body from medicines dissolutive for bad putrefied humors, and beware of meats causing fermentation.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vакирир", and is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen those whom I say this of.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it is cut from another piece; the pain departed from that place and pierced into the shoulder, and then a little while later spread throughout the body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that it went around within the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease proceed in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Every way, I wished well to move the pain from there to another place, but I did not wish it so much as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a hard core, with veins uncovered, and because these wind weaknesses were constrained; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who have soft bodies and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears as we have said, cleanse above and below quickly, and then apply on until those wind weaknesses constrained at that place are gone; and cauterize the place. And if you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it as those that expel winds, such as bitter pills, blistering wafers of serapin, and similar things.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are of various kinds, according to their shapes and the places in which they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their kind is that some have large points, and small ones, and hooked ones, and fused ones; and some have two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces. And the one that lodges in any limb does so in various ways: or it may lodge in a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it lodges in any part of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about later, appear: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes after in many ways; and when none of these bad signs appear, and the arrow is not fully extracted, you should remove it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and a vein that is above the brain bursts, is when there is scotomia and sodor and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it comes from the nostrils or the ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and a moist white discharge from the wound as if it were pus, and it appears like boiled flesh; and if you see this sign, keep to treatment, and extract the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or pierces the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and brings dark blood, and causes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never came out is that without bubbles of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and refreshes himself with cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the cover of the foot, it affects the small bones; it causes great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls onto the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with some undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls onto the belly, and it jumps out leaving some hay through the intestinal tract, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine spurts out and flows, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the arm, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary bone, spine of the back, femur, and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow struck or pierced in the root of the nose: I tried it, and extracted it from the other side under the ear fat, and he recovered without any difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And draw out an arrow that fell into the grease of the eye beneath the paper, and the arrow was lodged, and one could not reach it from the side of the wood, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, light as iron without ears; the patient recovered, and no bad accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab with ears: I plucked the barbs, and drew it out thoroughly, and the Christian recovered.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And drew out an arrow from the man, which had pierced his side or belly, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition at all. I cut into the arrow, removed it, and drew it out thoroughly, and he had no bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow that fell or pierced his back, and the wound was sewn up; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural position, nor caused any harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to treat another man, who has an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he remained thus suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow struck a man among the king's princes, which it had hit in the neck, and was slightly倾斜向右侧；并且那支箭完全穿透了。我被叫去为它治疗，在它落下的三天后。
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with great subtlety, and did not feel it; and there was a puncture and pain beside his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a poultice of atrative and digestible plaster on it, because the eyes were not swelling; and I found the eye affected by the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice for several days, and redressed the wound again. The patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow in his nose on the following day; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicinal substance to the wound for several days until it was opened, and examined it; I felt the tip of the arrow which was corroding at the site; then I continued applying that corrosive medicine in the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became clearly visible; and it passed through well, taking more than four months. Then I widened the wound so thoroughly that I could use pliers to extract it from both sides, but it would not come out; therefore, I continued examining and devising methods with various instruments until I successfully extracted it using properly made pliers, as described in the form shown at the end of this chapter.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and the wound was sewn, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or have I told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you apply your cure to what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything; but wise masters compare on very little, and on what is present and lacking, find new work, and nine instruments, for the descent of foreign things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are of two kinds according to where they enter: either by the place where they enter or by another part; and that which enters through the place where it enters is an arrow entering the flesh, and does not enter again now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not burst now, let it be left until the flesh rots entirely, and the pus is released; and also if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it so for some days, and change it each day; then it will burst, and if it does not burst, pierce through to all the innermost parts with something subtle, until the flesh inside is widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the symptoms I have said to the patient: do not draw it out at all, but let it be until it is equalized after a few days, for if the arrow comes just to the syrinx, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not pierced deep only into the bone, and does not come as far as the surface, and the patient remains without any bad accidents for several days, then the device for extraction should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed easily, I administer taretors into it, as I have said; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body and one cannot see it, keep quiet about it entirely. And if you feel it, extract it with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, cut open the skin so that the wound becomes larger; then extract the arrow if possible, and if it has parts attached such as feathers that hold it, remove the flesh that is embedded on both sides up to where you can reach. Then break or bend the feathers of the arrow until you can extract it; and be very careful not to break the arrow, as this would make extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it remain until the joint is rotten, then remove it, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding contraries you, apply what we have said regarding treatment in this chapter; and be careful of incising the nerve or vein, and find a way to extract the arrow gently so that it can be done quickly or slowly, firmly or carefully; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow fell upon him, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot do this, place him as the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another direction, or if it penetrates something else, or if the skin is swollen in such a way that one can see or feel it: cut there, as deep as the forceps can grasp, and then extract it: if it is now embedded.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is still in, push the whole shaft; and if the shaft falls out, when you see that a thrust is needed, I will administer the instrument thrusting, so that the point of the arrow enters the hole of the instrument; and then push with force, and if the arrow is lodged, I will push the instrument at the point entering in, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touching, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or pierces in the belly or bladder or side, and it is near, you may try to extract it; and guard against extracting the vein or the nerve, then extract it, and suture the wound if need be; and treat until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the feathered rod is similar to the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for pressing and knowing this is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	of veins from which one is healed there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are principal, that is to say: two jugulars which are behind the ears, called "herbech" in pairs; and the two arteries which are in the temples visible; and the veins which are in the lacrimal glands of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein which runs through the forehead; and the vein which is on the nose; and the two subclavian veins which are at the neck; and the two veins which are in the upper lips above the mouth, these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the veins which are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the flexor, and it is that from which one bleeds, which clearly appears above the pocket.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the basilic vein is the vein that is between the auricular and annular, and it has two tendons; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of which is below the corona of the pocket on the left side, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nephros," which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The treatment of veins located behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of this treatment, as I have said, are that you reset the patient's head, and rub the area or veins with a rough cloth. Then bind the patient's neck to a screw so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two holes depending on the head: hold them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, prick; then take the lancette, insert it beneath the vein up to the bone, lift your hand all along the vein upwards, cut and remove the skin and vein well twice through, and let the blood flow out until you see it. Then drain and bind it so that it heals; and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is worth old numbness, stiff, and accustomed to blindness, and in the body of tears on their eyes; and the quality of this health is as I say: and it is that the patient restrains his throat, so that the two veins clearly appear; and one feels a pulse under your thumb, and then begins to cut; then lift the heart over the vein up to your index finger, and place the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upwards, and the cap, as you have done with the other veins, and draw off the blood according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then form it well, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of them regarding their tying and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sainie of the vein on the forehead is as effective as the cephalic in ancient headaches and migraines, and for redness; and its quality is that the patient feels pain along the path of the vein when it is compressed; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then release the pain in the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is sound, and do not repeat the work with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	In all cases, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too hot; and apply the heat from the side, as the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame may break the bone when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes, and for headache, and for flushing, and for the redness in the eye, and for diseases of the face; and the qualities of their health are such that the patient draws his soul out through his neck by twisting any one vein, as before; then the savior, and let the saving pass through a little bit long like a flame a little bit wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance it breaks; then make the blood flow as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein of the neck is good for water and strong poisoning, and for face diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the qualities of its health are such that the patient draws his soul out by twisting the vein, then pulls his neck towards your left hand, and takes a subtle long flame, and sticks it between the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well without, and the breath will begin to flow now; and do not go too perfect, and make the blood flow as much as you need according to your necessity, then tie it for a night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The sinews of the two glands help in narrowing the throat, and in the beginning of a mixture, and much disease, and empitying, and corrosion, and herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the sinew is that the patient draws his neck away from one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be above the patient's head, and the patient lie on the seat, then make a cut along the long vein somewhat widely, then draw temperate blood, or as much as is needed; then do another thing in the other vein, then untie the thread, and compress the veins moderately, that the patient does not choke; and let him remain until morning, so that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of the sinew of the glands
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The veins of the lips above help in swelling in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and around the nose and between them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are such that it makes the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one being on the right lip and the other on the left, and they can be known by their blackness, and by the small black veins around them: cut both of them, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, cut the largest from each side, and similarly make cuts above and below, for it is done in the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the disease beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The disease of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the disease of the cephalic vein, and it is in the narrowing of the throat, and diseases of the uvea, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the venous remedy is such that the patient's disease becomes clear before your eyes in the sunlight, and it eases the tongue, and you look beneath on each side a black vein: therefore one is healthy and the other also, and do not apply too much, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the throat that are commonly treated can be cured in two ways: either by pricking with a sharp martyr flame or with a subtle olive oil as you hear cut, and it is called "anisil"; and they are large and subtle according to the size and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the martyr's flame is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has necessity to open veins full of thick blood and containing much blood and turbidity; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointed subtle, and is for cleansing thin veins, or where there is thin yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are in the throat, neck, side, and abdomen; and it is suitable for the physician to bleed by incision and to avoid the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding comes forth, it must be stemmed, as I have said; and fire should not be applied, but clamped like a pincers.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, it must be extracted, and replaced with another; or if you wish to use any vein in its place for the incision through the arm: it will open clearly; and clamp it with a pincers of flax, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the site of the incision, it must be thus that you extract the arm, touching the site until you feel the pulse; then mark the site with a pencil, and then bind the arm, clamp the vein with a flax pincers; and beware that you do not pierce the artery when you see the site swollen, for this is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see bulging upwards as with urine in a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: then hasten, and place your finger longwise, then remove your finger when the veins have stopped; several times this happens; if the limb is wounded, leave it thus, and do not move the patient in fear; let them remain still until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the veins are not stopped, and it pains you, and medical help is not present, cut the artery if it appears, for the head of the blade will stop it; stop the veins.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark of willow, split it, and take one half and bind it well just to the other day; if the veins stop, that is good; if not, treat it as we have said, using powders that stop blood; but the bindings are not griés for many positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm for drawing blood above the shoulder and below the body helps to treat blood from the head, as it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; it is necessary for the patient to guard against the nerve beneath, and if he points too deeply, and finds the nerve, and it swells, and the health is harmed, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in any man due to its subtlety, it is necessary that you anesthetize the vein with the instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it open along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; it is necessary to anesthetize by pricking with olive oil flame or myrtle oil, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has no nerve or artery beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In every way, it is necessary to seek the lightest touch, and do not overdo it if needed for the first time, and one recommences; and by chance swelling occurs in some people after the first attempt, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the sinew is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about sinew is that sinews are not strained except to maintain health and avoid future diseases; and the sinews should be treated in one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should treat the sinews at the beginning of prayers on bended knees, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and one should treat the sinew on the first or third day after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The remedy given for diseases has no fixed hour appointed, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in every season; and it is not fitting to treat children under fourteen years, nor women with child from the fourth month until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Old people who have passed sixty years should not be treated either.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when any wish to be treated, whether in the morning or evening, it is fitting that they cleanse their intestines with a light enema, if they have not retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines their putrid superfluities harmful to the principal limbs; nor should those who are too salty from meat, drunk to excess, or dropsical be treated. And when one desires to treat after colic pain, vomiting, and evacuation of the bowels, frequent copulation and travail, staying awake and fasting, and those whose virtues are diminished by weapon or body; then subtlely let the humors, if they are gross, through meat and drink and medicines, if you have the power. Then between bathing, if nothing prevents it, to subtilize the blood, and treat the vein below the third toe, as we have said; and on that day avoid work, labor, and lustful acts, and similar things; remain bound and laid down, and let the one treating be higher than he whom they are treating, and rub their arm two or three times, then gently extract the ligature above. For when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correctly draw the blood; then rub the leg with your hands until the veins swell, and you feel them; afterwards anoint the treturer’s hand with a little old oil, then place his left hand under the vein near where they wish to treat, ensuring the vein does not become bruised by the iron.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as cords in the physician, and some are full of windiness, such that when one applies fire to them, they recoil from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are of this kind; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the physicians must be cautious about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; but if not, one should attempt to open it again slightly below or above that place, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient feels pain, one should leave it for a day or two, and not bind the arm: perhaps abscesses will form. Do not go into a bath, but continue with the operation if the physician wishes; and if the opening is small, or the vein thin, and you doubt whether there is as much blood as you see, then apply the flame directly to that opening; work quickly, while the limb is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swollen, do not begin healing until it is healthy, and put a little olive oil over it, for it lightens the body of blood, and causes the oil to dry up that which is in this place; thus administer the oil juice in each wound that you heal the veins, to staunch the course of blood; and the same thing is done with treacle and bowe of haws when one puts them over the limb; so subtlely does it penetrate and separate when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes an abscess large, which often happens, even when it is not healed more than that one time or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put over the limb a sponge moistened in water and salt a bit warm, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood from the vein has issued. And if it remains on the limb after some days any blackness or greenish color, it does not harm it at all; and if you see, put over it any preparation of aloes or myrrh immersed in calamus, mustard, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance on the skin of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance it might cut the artery; but make him a dry plaster to harden the area, and then treat with other remedies until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for him who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be healed little but often, and you must heal in cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing is saved from running of blood and compression of nerve, and it is better than long or wide wounds.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him whose body requires nourishment during healing, it is fitting to give moist food in juice of pomegranates; if he is heated, draw blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, eat moist food before healing in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-odored syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it swells on the side, after the discharge of much blood, it must inhale broth of flesh, and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it sees fit to let the arm swell and be injured again, when it is weakened by great swelling, it must be allowed to swell little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever sees fit to let the arm swell after the first swelling, and if it has strong virtue, it must be allowed to swell for seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one sees fit to be injured on another side, it must be injured on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and it brings fever; so it is necessary to draw out great quantity, and widen the opening until it heals in the flesh; then when you fulfill all conditions of health, and place your hand on your pulse where it is healthy, that death not come from under the flesh; and this happens often, when physicians are negligent; but it is not proper when you see release the arm, and let blood a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly upon it; nor if it is crooked, that you stretch the arm quickly, for that would be bad; but let it be until it heals a second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the one who is frozen reaches from under the vein to the opening, and put some salt in water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be, and do not compress it, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need arises to treat the blood a second time, let it be done in that very vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of treating it is that the patient puts their hand in warm water until the fingers are red; then tie it moderately so that the vein is clearly visible, and now siphon the blood from the side, not from the length or width; make the puncture large, and place the siphoning close to the joint of the hand. If no more blood can come out, put the hand back in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; if it is in winter, do not repeatedly dip the hand in warm water, as it should be used more in summer than in winter; and the treatment of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve that can be damaged.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sickness of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: extract the hand, and put it in hot water until the veins are swollen, if one can see them; and if the wound is crooked, and if you cover it completely, do not grieve anything; and do not go too perfectly done, because the nerve is under all stripped of flesh, and then put the hand in hot water again if the wound is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood as much as it needs, put a cloth with oil and salt on the vein to seal it quickly, and do this for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse [likely referring to an abscess or similar condition], and do everything as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The soul's health is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as liver diseases, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the old thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its health is that diseases cause pain in hot water, and are rubbed on the vein until it pains, and tied above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot goes much urine; therefore, keep it healthy or wider vein, or at the ankle, which moves well.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you keep it healthy on the foot, watch the nerves that are beneath, and keep them healthy as well by cutting carefully; let the flaxen thread be ready.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the stone cannot come out, put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the stone is needed for the first time, begin again the second time above a little, because the loins are salted; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do with the sponge of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The loins of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its stone is worth for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its stone is such that the patient should enter the bath, and extract four doigts above the ankle by twisting, otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, you can stone it in all ways that you can, and by crossing it; it is better to cop it because the loins are sound, and it is very responsive to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, search any vein from the front or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and draw off as much blood as you see, then release the bandage, and put on a cloth and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	with suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is performed in two ways: either by fire or without fire; and the suction made by pricking and extracting blood is done at fourteen places on the body, of which one is right under the head; another is behind the neck; two are on each side of the neck; one is below the chin; one is on each shoulder; one is above the armpits; one is on each arm; one is on each leg; one is on each ankle; and suction does not draw blood, but only small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken much, as we do with a vein from a vein. And it should not be administered by fire or without fire in any disease coming from overfullness, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of sickness it is fitting to bleed, or for custom, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or in the end, and between and in every time; for there are such as, when they have need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are such as find fullness and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darkness before their eyes; and such as find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swelled tongue, and spit blood.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is between the months, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sinew of the muscle aids in the breaking of the head's chief... that comes to them, and it should not be after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in place of the sinew of the cephalic, and it should not be used by those of cold complexion or who have chatharre, for it does them much harm; because of this, it should not be used by those who watch nor by those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who frequently draw blood thus become forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the cupping device a little more downward due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation at the neck is in place of the sinew of the head and the basilica vein, and because of this, it is useful for narrowing the pulse, and for cutting into the channel of the subclavian artery, and for swelling; and it should be applied only briefly, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind-vasations near the second ribs of the neck are for headaches, eyesight issues, migraines, stranglements, and tooth root pain; they are in the place of the health of the basilica. You must instruct the healer to extend his hand when placing it, not pressing the artery, and preventing any loss of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wind-vasations below the chin are for mouth diseases, gum corruption, and similar ailments that affect the mouth; they are in the place of the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind-vasations of the shoulders are for diseases that come from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind-vasations near the ribs are as effective as those of the third veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; you must instruct the healer not to pierce too deep, as the muscles are bare of flesh and one can feel the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the rump is good for hemorrhoids from the fundament and below, and it should be large, made of iron, which needs to be well-treated; and by chance, if it were fine, it would break; and I make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs cleanse openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the thighs, the hips, and the bladder, and diminish tumors; and they are placed at the two ankles and the two calves, and in any case, they weaken the body after long use, and bring about paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should first empty it and gently warm it up, then quickly place it, move it evenly, and do not stop until you see the area turn red and swell, and the reddish blood appears; then remove it, and put the suction cups back. Be mindful of the condition of the body, for some have thick flesh and clear pores: in such cases, you should pierce only once, make large wounds, and slightly deeper ones.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it must be pricked twice: the first time to dilate the path of the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very full, it must be pricked three times; and when we wish to draw blood little by little, we puncture only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw much blood, we begin often; and if the vein is full, pierce it thoroughly, and let the openings be such that the cords are cut suddenly, and for those who have thick skin and are hard, and have narrow pores, you should apply to the eyes of the cups anointing and dissolving oil: if it is in heat, with olive oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in cold, with mustard oil, or linden oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsamite oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one being cured has flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mullein water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, let them rise from almond, or mulberry water, or sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or decoction of syrup, or infusion of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not advisable to cure with suction before the bath or after bathing, but one hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep after fomentation, and must be warmed when it is necessary to suction and when he is being suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch over him who is healing if he is choleric, and if the blood is too acrid and inflamed; it is fitting that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in vinegar, and similar things; and eat maggots, and meat from a dormouse, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, let him take syrop of honey, and medium-smelling wine between old and new, and eat little, and eat maggots and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than eat; and it is fitting to give some men treacle or mace before or after cupping to comfort the principal members; and let his blood be subtle, but it is not fitting that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed without piercing are those placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and gout, and on the belly and mouth and veins and thigh, for these parts do not tolerate being pierced at their roots, and one uses fire only to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on nipples when a child nurses; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and mouth to alleviate the swelling of the member; and to relieve pain, when there is a boil or stone, it may by its attractive virtue remove the boil or dislodge the stone from its place; thus does it do when placed on the liver and lungs when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty only to suck out; sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a manner we fill the cup with hot water or boiled herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two inches wide and half a palm of copper, and have or cut a small hole in the middle for inserting an needle, as for sticking a needle, and let it be of tin, with a wick in front so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb; and have in the middle a cross rod of tin or iron to put a candle holder on, and let there be both large and small ones according to the diseases and the strength of those who use them; for children's suction cups are different from adults', and thin people's from fat people's.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must place the suction cup on the limb in this manner: take the candlewick of wax or linament, and put it into the suction cup through the cross rod that is inside the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the patient; then put it on the limb, and let your two fingers be over the hole as we have said, so that when you want to, the vapor goes out, and remove the suction cup; and around the hole, apply linament as before, and repeat often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping applied for diseases of the lungs, for all acute conditions, there is neither a vein nor a hole, and it is not applied forcefully unless it is full of fluid, and is placed on the limb only; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping is not applied forcefully on parts where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on bare skin, such as elbows or knees, and others like them; and the quality of the cupping should be that when you find blisters in clear, sweet water without corruption, take them; and place one nut in clear water until they are familiar and have nothing inside; then bleed by incision and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the blisters on it; and when they are full and fall out, if it is a place where a cup can be placed, put it there, for this is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not so, lift the arm from the armpit, and then with water, very well, and then press it. And if the limb heals too soon after the body of the veins, make a soft linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the flesh be infected; and if the wounds multiply, place on vitriol broken or garlic, and similar things, until they be infected; or you put over the limb half of peeled beans, and let them be until they dry out on the limb, and will stop bleeding now. And if you have more need of it, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not wish to take, rub the limb with fresh blood, or stick a needle in them until the wounds bleed, and then place them on. As soon as they smell the blood, they will dry out; and when you see that they are weeping, sprinkle a little aloes and ground salt or ashes over them, and they will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear friend, that the knowledge contained in this chapter was not found in any of the ancient books or letters they read; and for this reason, the science has been lost in our land, for I have never found a good one among them. And I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, in which I studied so much that I treated of the science, and through experience, and by custom from my life. And I have here described to you what is contained, abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the summary of our words and the chapters where the wise ones place their understanding, remaining on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twists or sprain comes to any person, it must be treated by healing the patient from both sides, if nothing else affects him, such as bodily weakness, or illness, or age; or if his hand is not very warm, or too cold; and he should consume cold wood, that is to say, cold javelina tusks, and meat of bird and chervil, and should not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and should not fill himself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or spread of matter in the limb; then the patient returns to his former regimen as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient meat that promotes rapid healing or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, peas, and fish, fresh eggs, and good wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And in the case of meat, it represents nourishment and more quickly heals the fractures.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones in the elderly and decrepit cannot heal or set well according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset the broken bone with large bandages which will firm up and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; yet do not fully complete their work, and for this reason, they must be fed large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	And know that the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	And there are fractures that go lengthwise, and others that go across, just like the cuts of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each kind, it has its own tool and instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings to its place; and fractures of the bone are known by the distortion of the limb, and clearly by tapping and pressing with the hand. And when there is no distortion, nor a sound upon pressing, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there may not be a fracture; but it can still have distortion, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move it by hand, then apply medicines that come after this, and then hold it delicately now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that goes into the bone, and are the two parts disjoined, you must now put them in alignment equally, as abscesses covered come to life; and if abscesses hard come to life, you let them any day, until the abscesses be calmed; then put it equal to the place where you can gently and safely, and know that the restoration of the former is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it as it suits after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, you must set them from both sides, whether it is a hand or foot, or by your own hand for smaller members, or by two strings, or one string and your own hand; and place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you reset all additions within their places at the joint where you can, and guard that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems not quite right: straighten it beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly, nor press it as those who bring on a hot abscess and contraction to the limb through their work, as we have often desired.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in proper condition, well rest the patient so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor when turning over, nor in any other way; and be sure that the limb is securely placed so that no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in proper condition, and it must be placed in such a way that no pain is felt; and take care that it is properly aligned so that no deformity occurs when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I have said.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are varied in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For small limbs, such as arms and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths; and for large ones, such as the thigh and leg: they should be wrapped with a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages encircle the entire large limb evenly, so that there are no wrinkles; then tie them tightly around three or four times according to the limb, and slightly tighten your hand on each bandage, then go above the break and tighten it less, so that the break can be moved a little away from the break; and soften the bandage gradually, until you see a large part of the healthy tissue, then take the other bandage, and rewrap again over the broken area; then return to the part below the break, and wrap moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first lesson above; then place linen or cloth strips evenly between the tied bandages, so that they are all equal, then tie everything with a bandage from above, and then put on your well-made pillows if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something soothing and heating for the abscess, and that reduces swelling, and leave it on for a few days; then extract with your linen strips, which should be half as wide as a thick rope, or from wood used for ax handles, or from palm ribs, and they should be of this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it must be that the linen strips which one places on the break are slightly wider and longer than the others; and should be as long as is fitting for the member's size or greatness. Then hold the linen strips in place just as you did at the first application, then tie a suitable thread over them as you did at the first application to the break; the threads must be closer together beneath, thus less so above; and it must be that the thread be medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax. For if the thread is thick, like those used by the craftsmen who make their applications from twisted linen cords, this is a great error, for the application cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it does not suit that there be less than two fingers' width between each strip.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the shoulders of the needles after the tightening in their sound places, put over them lint or a cloth bandage so that it does not swell.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	And when the wound is burned and the sinews are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to tightly bind the needles for all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to tightly bind them with needles immediately but rather after 5 days or 7, or more according to your judgment following a hot abscess occurring; and here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that sticks to the mill walls, mix it with abundant egg, and apply this mixture not too thin nor too thick. And use it, as this is the common method for applying a restorative plaster for treating many conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster to restore fracture and dislocation and torsion: take 3 parts of bay leaves and garlic and onions and gum arabic and myrrh and musk, mix 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, mix 5 parts; saltpeter 9 parts; make into a powder, mix with honey from one egg; if the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster for torsion: take myrrh and benzoin, mix 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, mix 9 parts; camphor 6 parts; armenian wax 10 parts, grind well, compound with water or honey from one egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another plaster for joints and bones broken from their places, and relieves the pain that comes, and the cutting of the bone, and the breaking: take new wool, and the marrow in swine's fat and cooked oil, and put on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another plaster to heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another plaster for the healing of bone fractures and to reduce the swelling of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of visvalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of cloves, of each one part; and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the members are heated, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to apply a plaster stronger than the first, when an abscess is hard and comes during the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of visvalve, and seeds of flax, balsam, hyssop, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind them, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	And Hippocrates states in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb to restore strength that cerote made of wax and oil does, and nothing else more, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that one should apply on the broken limb things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster useful for injury and pain: take mithridate and hemp seeds decorticated, or bird feathers, and vismale, and equal parts salt, and grind them, and make a plaster with them.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove it after some time, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if it is not necessary to remove it by hand. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, with no relief or swelling, you should remove it quickly, and take off the plaster now; and use a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, and soak it in water, and lift the limb until the itching ceases and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then place on dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of the warm abscess; and reduce inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the delicate ligature, and a little plaster, but do not tie it so tight as before; and continue with subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is empty and redness and pain and swelling have been removed from all parts, and you need to apply a plaster and bandage, then proceed with it as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if none of what we have said comes to the member, and it is not dislocated after three or four or five or seven days; and at one time you leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the broken ends harden, and bring the alignment close to the flesh above; then restrain it more than before, and let it grow its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the place is drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; wash the dislocation with hot water each time you dislocate it, and let it be every third day, and lessen the swelling a bit; by this work then cut the nourishment from the member, and mend quickly what the foolish menders do, which leave the member deformed: this is bad, and such are fearful works, and I see nothing else but to leave it and operate properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of breaking are, and various forms, and the causes are destined; for there are breaks made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bones break all the bone just beneath the bone, as done by a hammer or stick; and because of this, this way of breaking is called "hatchet wound.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this way of breaking is called "absolute"; it includes wounds from these two breaks, whether large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a compression break, or a fracture of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar ones.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break nearby, which approaches just to the tissue beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as subtly as hairs, and is a small split, and for this it is called a "capillary" break; and if the wound made by striking with a stone, or falling, or some similar thing, causes a piece of bone to enter from below, and the edges are like those a smith makes when striking on cauldrons; so the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or are children with moist bones, such as a child's bone; and it happens in all these types of break where small pieces come loose like splinters; and I will speak of this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all manners of breaks through their subtraction, and by inquiry with tests, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known in this way: when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, black breaks appear.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take heed of the bad symptoms in the patient, and if you see any ill symptoms such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, fainting, convulsions, fever, and the eyes turning outward and becoming red, and other similar things due to various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any terrifying symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractures come first to you, and it is in winter, then you must extract the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to extract the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone deteriorates, and the accidents as we have said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in such a way: and you must take hold of the edge of the injured patient, uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and more over the figure of the wound. And if bleeding from the bone occurs upon uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, then aid as necessary, and it is that you fill the space with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses subside, and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin to extract around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut narrowly before, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then one cuts a larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron filings; and work lightly, so as not to burn the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it through, so that you make incisions with points, not fully through but beyond the bone at the back, and should have a margin or circle above the point, such that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to its place according to the thickness of the bone, and you should have points for all parts; and this is the form of three kinds of points.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing through the broken bone are that you place the needle on the bone, turn to your two sides until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the needle a little further elsewhere, and do this throughout, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have such as forceps, pinchers; and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the sphenoid.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you release the tension which has remained between the bone and any other similar instrument to an incisor, but it must be more tense and finer than another incisor; and if there remains nothing of the small bones or any scales, remove them gently with instruments; then treat the wound with cloths and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galien said, which is safer; and it is very strong, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lancet-shaped instrument the one described here in detail.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and let the fracture be in two parts, so that the cutting is opposite the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take great care of the membrane beneath; if it is dry against the bone, break the bone gently, for it can be broken very harmfully and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then it must be treated by smoothing out that roughness, and removing scales with a fine razor of which you should have various quantities, to apply in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you need to use large razors first and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other small incisions and fine fractures, you must apply it according to its direction; and this is something that is not given to him who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the syphacia is uncovered, you must take linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and grease it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled two or three times, and grease it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the syphacia, then apply a bandage over the other one, and do not tie it too tightly that it hurts the wound; leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscesses are calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, fennel flour, incense powder, and aromatics, and similar things; make a powder of these things and apply it to the wound, and continue administering medicaments without causing irritation; ensure that the wound is clean, do not leave the ointment or allow it to accumulate on the head cloth, for when wine accumulates on the covering of the brain, it runs down and causes great harm to the patient; because when anything sharp is applied to the syphacia, the nerves are affected above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, there is doubt concerning it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if night or some other evil comes only because of the medicine we have put on, that it has virtue, you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one part of gum, and put it on the sore; then cure it in the manner of cures that it should be healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one alone, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break nor cause pain by bending or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you set your little finger or thumb from birth, and place the break evenly within your index finger, and the pouch by division, so that the nose regains its natural figure; do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nose and the fingers cannot reach the place, it must be that you set them evenly on the head of a needle somewhat large.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, do the same on the other side, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can; otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have subsided, then place tenters of linen thread on the head of the nose if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you place it on the other side, where the break is; let the wicks be so large that they fill the pores of the navel.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And any restorer should melt the wicks in butter and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem right to me, but they should be melted in a mixture of egg white and flour powder; then leave the wick until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes place goose quills in its place of wicks, and insert them into the navel, and keep the wound closed, and blow with the patient facing whichever direction you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses break during the work, apply a poultice or moist cotton in rose oil, or with a little balsam.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not break during the work, apply an ointment externally, made from silkweed flour and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk. Then place light stops over it, but do not bind the nose; and if the nasal fracture is small, and broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound and treat the soft tissue injuries and wounds with appropriate ointments and poultices; and if there are no internal nasal wounds, treat with splints until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound open, and the break is only fissured, not broken into pieces like beams inside, one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	When the break is in the right part of the jaw, you should place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left mandible, you should use your right hand to gently press on the break and fix it with the other hand through an opening.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is separated into two parts, you should apply an extension to both parts, making them equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, strain them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place on the broken jaw a compress, and put over it a double bandage; and place over the bandage a large well-made pad, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, and fasten it at the mouth as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, release it on the third day, and then set what has changed back in place; and apply a poultice with powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour after you have removed the compress; and place light wool over the poultice, and if the poultice dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a gangrenous abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no fragment of the bone that is removed; so subtle to remove with instruments convenient for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flambes according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these fragments, and there remains none, close the wound if it is large, and apply plasters convenient for this, to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the forcele
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forcele breaks many times before, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and separated into two parts, with one piece, and this is the easiest to reset; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operation is such that when the break is without a wound, you should have two assistants, one holding the shoulder where the forcele is broken, and the other extending the neck towards the affected part; then place the break evenly on your two hands, so that the form be as it should, and there be no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place a round pad of cloth or wool over the shoulder on the patient, and make it as large as necessary; then stretch and lift the forcele, and hold the pad with your hand, so that you can place the break evenly, as it should.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards, because it comes from below fully, then it is fitting that the patient lie often on his side, and place under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have the attendants press the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then treat the fracture with your two hands, and if you find any pieces displaced, you must split them; and draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, take one of your incisors; but place this instrument under the shoulder to prevent leakage.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not misplaced, and be as wide as it ought to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and let one be broad, and the other narrow, as are the edges of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come around, I wrap them in rose oil and vinegar, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is affected by wounds and surgery, is that you apply the plaster of powder from the mill and egg yolk to the bone, then cover with light stops, and place a sphere underneath if needed; then take a very wide bandage about one palm in width, put the cloth doubled over the stops and the plaster. Take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, wrap it around that bandage so the ends hang down, and place the stick on the break, turn the bandage over the neck, under the stop, and between the healthy and affected areas; tighten each part, and when you see that the ties hold the break properly, and clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, reward it daily. When the ligaments loosen, release the restraint; have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the stop to raise the shoulder. This will alleviate the force of the injury by supporting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, for up to twenty days. Then reapply the plaster if needed, keep it tight until restored; it is restored in most cases within twenty-eight days, and sooner for some individuals.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When it comes to the breaking of the shoulder or large crack, and cannot be felt by touch; arrange the parts according to the figure of the break, and reset them according to their natural form in all ways you can; then place on the bone flour mixed with abundant egg, and light plugs, and cover with a double cloth; then put over a broad and thin strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is any movement in any part of the shoulder, use linen plug threads to secure it so that the strip remains evenly placed; and then tightly bind it with a large bandage, ensuring the strip does not move from its place, and examine the ligaments each day; whenever it settles, tighten the binding, and adjust the strip if it is out of place, and let the patient rest on their side; the shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days. And when these numbers are completed, release the bindings, and be sure, for it is not bone that sets quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone tends forward, and not over the heart, cut it out, and do as we have said in breaking the strong ligament to treat hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of breaking the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and has difficulty walking. Immediately, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movement in the broken bones becomes apparent, and everyone can see this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies mostly on their back, and they place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and carefully position them so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply plasters and ointments over the thin layer of salt or another light substance, wrap them in a cloth, and tie them around the broken bone to keep them from moving; turn the bandage round the back, adjust it appropriately, and secure the bandage every hour. If it becomes loose, tighten it; if it needs to be untied for corrosion or itching at the site, pain, or an abscess, act quickly, untie it, remove the plaster, and treat the area as in regular care; then reapply the plaster and keep it tight until healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaking of the ribs comes from force applied behind the shoulder and at the head inside, and they bend due to being overly flexible; one can feel it well upon inquiry around the area.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is to place the break equally, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bandage it with a cloth if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is inward, the patient feels great pain and a stabbing sensation, similar to tears, because the bone pierces the tissue; they wrinkle their face and immediately vomit much blood, which is a serious health issue. The elderly have used great skill in treating this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is fitting to administer foods that swell the belly, to drive away the colic.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make those who have not had an abscess come to one.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have had one, let them be cured.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And if any of you put cups on the shoulder to draw fluid strongly, and it seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt that the cups will attract the superfluities to the shoulder due to the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And if any of you say that we should cover the shoulder with wet wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the duration equal, then it should be treated with the pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the bone where the tissue is torn, and there is doubt for the patient, it is necessary to incise above the rib of the broken costal cartilage, and put something under the instrument to protect the lung; then one must cut the bone, and draw lightly, and afterwards suture the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses continue, put wet cloths in rose oil and place them on the rib; and treat continually the rib as needed for the abscess, and let him lie over the side where it should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the bones of the neck are broken, and rarely does it bend; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be cured or not, observe whether their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many respects, and if they can move and feel well when you hold and prick them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will recover if proper care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be cured or not, observe whether the pieces are softened, and if the accidents in the hands, and on the back due to wind and involuntary evacuation; and when it is touched on their abdomen, an involuntary evacuation follows.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sooted on its back and he wishes to heal, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is fatal: he should not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this does not happen to him, it is the lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply it if there is a hot abscess, placing an oil of rose or egg yolk on it until it subsides; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage. Instruct the patient to rest; do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone cracks, it must be covered with a cloth. Remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, if large, with stitches. Bind it with ointment promoting healing until it is healed. And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," you should hold your left handbag with your left hand and equalize it with your right hand as much as possible. Then apply the poultice and dressing if needed; bind it tightly. If there is a cracked bone, cut out the fragment, remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the bone of the hip is fractured, and it happens, there will be a slight alleviation in the head; and it becomes long, and inclines towards the buttocks, and causes great pain, swelling, and redness at the site.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the fractured area; and know which part is broken and its shape. If the break is only in the head, you must set it so that it is aligned, ensuring it takes on a natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along its length, or it inclines inward, you must lie the patient on their stomach so that the restoration of the fracture can be aligned.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, put on the plaster, then put on a straw or rush mat, and hold the splint so that it does not move; and fill the space under the ribs, as the pieces should be even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses appear and swell, do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and put on what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and hold as it should be, if there is no adverse accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires are those between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, you must restore them according to one of two methods: of which one is that you take a rod filled with moineen grain size, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And join the two heads of the links, and bend them upwards, and place the patient's broken arm on the rod; then throw the broken part of the arm onto the rod, until it reaches the armpit, with a piece of wood in between, then bend it over any heavy thing or let the attendants extend it downwards; then put the broken parts together evenly with both hands, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you place the patient on his back, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants such that one holds the part above the break with both hands, and the other holds the part below the link, extending each to their respective sections.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament below the break, and above the break, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you place the ligament in the middle under the socket, and the other towards the knife, below the break; and likewise if the break is near the knife, you should place the ligament lightly, without strain, so that the break is equal both under the bone and under the knife; then set the break as it should be, and hold it, if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, you should not hold it tightly for seven days, and place a moistened cloth in oil of rose on the arm and under the shoulder or chest, until the abscesses are appeased; then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you apply the plaster over the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, holding tightly on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in a sling, unless something prevents it or the bone has not yet moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stays, and place a larger and stronger stay above the break, with two fingers' breadth between each stay, and let each stay be so large that it passes the break three fingers' breadth from both sides; then pull on the stays as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, more forcefully but less by drawing away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of the stays and the tension, as we have said, in the hour that you reset the broken limb, and you doubt whether the abscess is hot, let it remain free for seven days, as we have said; then examine each day the wound, to ensure that itching or swelling does not arise at the site, or that the granulations cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the treatment, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents happen, let the patient not be dislocated for more than three days or longer, and let the patient lie on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder a cushion full of evenly stuffed wool, and watch every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the tendons do not become soft; let the treatment proceed by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat as we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when it begins to take hold, make it more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is custom that the shoulder and the leg should be repositioned within forty days from the beginning; then one must reset them and administer baths and ointments to treat them.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and contracted, it must remain to be untied for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fasciculus," of which one is small and is that which surrounds the pouch; and the other is large, and is that which is beneath, opposite the small finger; by chance the large fasciculus may be broken alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fasciculus is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and worse than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small fragile bone that is broken only, then it should be extended gently and placed evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, you should extend it more forcefully; and place it on the bench, and hold the pouch of your hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others. And let the patient cross his limbs over himself, and the bench in front higher so the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch your ministers' arms under your hand or to the side, and another minister above the other part.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the bones evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its place. And if there is any detached part that cannot be grasped and restored to its place, cut it out, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And when using the blade for wounds, I spoke of it in the singular chapter; so take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, glue the bandage made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the bandage tightly enough so that the abscesses are alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of the powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg, then place the plasters, and let the blade plasters be tied more tightly, and a bit wider than the others; and know that there should be six plasters or arms in various positions: whether the blade is in one of the bones, or two. Bind more tightly above the blade than elsewhere, and loosen less as the days pass, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages above the blade be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh; and let the threads from which they are made be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you rinse the member with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the member rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the binding. If the ligaments have softened and the bones displaced, address as necessary.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you notice that the swelling cannot come to the member, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for a few days, until the swelling subsides, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not let him lie dislocated for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or about the neck, then turn him and place his hands on his neck, and let his neck be level, and guard against movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, according to the mixtures and compositions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers, there are few fractures, and there often comes much swelling.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or swollen, the patient should place his hand straight in front of him with the palm facing down; then have the assistants extend the broken bones and align the joints so they are properly joined; apply the plaster and stopes if no abscesses occur, and then place a bandage according to the size of the hand; and let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the bone of the sole between the toes, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it on his injured sole; and then wrap with a long strip of cloth, and let it be an istle of hemp wool as large as the palm of the hand, and wrap it so as is fitting.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the foot, it is fitting that you place one istle above and another below on the sole, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the toes.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our toes, if it is displaced, set it equal, as is fitting; and wrap it with the sole, and if you see, place a small straight istle to lift the fracture and prevent movement; and if the fracture is on other toes, such as in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and tie with the healthy toe that follows; or you may tie them all together, keeping them from moving, or place a patch like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back; and its restoration consists in tying above the break and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their side, then each minister extends their bandage to their respective part evenly; and this is when the break is placed on the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one bandage against the knife, and the other bandage below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then place the bandages below the knee, and the extension downwards; then set the bone equally with both hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, unless abscesses appear.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap the broken bone with a double bandage of two or three layers, and let any excess remain, then turn the leg until the heel touches the root of the toes, and place a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, and let the end of the thread appear above; then turn back to the leg and thigh with the bandage, and place strips over the broken bone; fill the space between the thigh and the leg with soft cloth to ensure equal pressure, then begin to tie three or four turns around the broken bone; as you go further from the broken bone, tie it less tightly; then adjust the two ends of the thread that you placed between the thigh and the leg, and place three strips above them, then return below to the end of the thread until you reach the foot; tighten so that it does not move in its place, then leave it as is, ensuring no abscess or swelling occurs elsewhere.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, release it, and set what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it must be washed if one can; and if one cannot, it must cut the flesh, and draw out the force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the thigh broken thus one sets it with stakes, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in the restoration thus performed, the patient does not complain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or somewhat less or somewhat more, according to the多样性 of constitution。
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is not merely a crack or hole, but comes about from any wound, and feels like a deep wound.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you place equal wax on its ends until they are firmly joined; then apply the plaster, and put a round stick if you need it, and hold it as necessary. Afterward, re-establish all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; apply what is suitable for each condition until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by its proper name "moustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and it breaks altogether as it does in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equally so, and the works are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bone is broken, then turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then there is great pain, and one can see it clearly; and turn it back.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and bind the straps equally; but in any case, if the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and more gentle; and lighten according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of woven willow that extend the length of the leg from the knee downward on both sides, then wrap them in two layers with one bandage over and under, and tie them in the middle. At this point, neither leg can decline to the right nor to the left, and thus it is well; no long pieces of willow are administered into the leg, and it is placed for guarding against movement. This is properly done at a fracture or where there is a wound; each day move the leg to see if there is any abscess or other accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones at the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	A the foot no break comes, but in the bones of the foot a break comes sometimes and in the toes much more, and there is strength only with many conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if a break comes in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones sticking out one over the other, set the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to walk, and then place your foot on its foot where the bones are raised, pressing them until they return to their places; then put the plaster and ointment on, and place a small board with two stones under the sole of the foot, then bind it properly. After you have wrapped it tightly with bandages and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers; then put on each broken finger a splint according to its length, and let it be somewhat wider, then put under the foot that block which I have said, and bind it appropriately; and if there are two or three or more broken ones, place on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the block under the sole of the foot; and let it be placed above the top of the block behind the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said for the other broken bones, as we have said; and support each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone at the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's hand is broken by nature, make her sit with her arm extended, then incline it toward the back part, and keep her supported behind; then fill the space in the woman's body with cotton, making it as large as the bone; then remove the woman and slowly elevate the back, so that the cotton comes to the entrance of the body, and the bone returns with the bone; and when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or more: thus will be restored the break, and if you want, take a bladder from a lamb, tie a string at the opening, and fill the entire bladder inside; then blow into the string forcefully, so that the bladder is inflated within: the body will return the break; then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who applies his study and understanding, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fractures signify in many dispositions the right way of restoration: understand them accordingly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose's jaw and insert the thigh into it; then wrap it tightly with bandages, and let it be for three days or longer, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, to be healed now, as our treatments indicate.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, treat it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then proceed to restore the damage at that same hour or on that day, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess develops, delay the restoration until the next new day, as long as the abscess is pacified. Do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause evil accidents to arise.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered shoulder, it is necessary to place it gently with your hands, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not provided to make it equal with your hands, use an instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight long prongs, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this, you need a splint that can be soaked in three or four parts, depending on what it needs for each treatment of a broken bone; and let it be round and slightly thick, so it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be flat in front, and wide at the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," which means that the curved heads of the shoulder must be placed on the top of the visible bone; and strike once, so that it returns, and let them be level against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, with a suitable instrument cut, using either an incisor or a soiree, to your power; then retain what remains in the bone by hardness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so while it is in its place, then wet a cloth in wine from a grape must, and properly if it is fresh; and do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound that it may cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer leeches when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not compressed with the breakage; and many times fools have done this and caused illness or death or corruption in the patient at least once; and let the compressions be softer and more gentle than other breakages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that some evil accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, it is not fitting to put on leeches; but wrap around, instead of leeches, cloths tightly, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the wound inking at the wound, remove what you have put on for all wine, and apply healing ointment for wounds, as tetralfarmacion and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb must be aligned in such a manner that the wound heals smoothly and gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the wound does not close further, know that there are small bone fragments, for which you must clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the shoulder, or any other form of corruption, it must be treated, according to what is stated in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opened in the same limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and others like them in the large limbs, do not reduce it, for many times death comes from it, but leave it until it rots; by chance it may fall out by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of blisters that come over the scalding
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the scalding, blisters come, especially when it is near the joint. It is a sad sight to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take heed that if the joint is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and shellac, acacia, and similar others, whichever of these you find or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine or with plenty of egg or with oil; place them on the knot in stoppered vessels, and bind well, not releasing by hand for several days; then remove it, and begin another until the knots are removed; or you may bind over a well-made piece of lint; for the property of linen is that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the knot has become as hard as stone and must be removed, cover with a poultice and let the excess appear; or you may have it shaved until it is removed, and cure until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after the member is weak and subtle, it happens for much reason: one of which is because it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishments could not come to the member; or due to too much swelling; or from too great movements, not at their proper time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and strengthen the body until the flesh multiplies in him; and you give him baths, and grant him joy and pleasure; then apply ointment to the member, so that the ointment draws towards the great nourishment, and frequently wash it with hot water until the nourishment comes to the member; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after recovery, and the broken bones are exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, all in all, it does not impair its natural function: one should not believe those fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many such foolish acts have been done in our land; these works are blamed, and they bring great harms, and by chance, death; altogether, if the swelling and pain are fresh, it is necessary to apply hot water, or to cook herbs that soften, such as leaves of vismarvel, roots, and marjoram, and similar medicines; then apply a soothing plaster, well made, and you take the muscilage of vismarvel, and mix it with tallow or olive oil, and apply it on top; or you take fatty figs, grind them with colon flour, and use similar medicines that reduce swelling suddenly.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodation is removed to be rubbed continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone and it needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut up to the bone with a sharp incisor gently; and apply careful attention and skill in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to someone, it is fitting now to reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Since one delays, the shoulder swells, and by chance if it is reset when swollen; because this is not fitting to move it while swollen: many times it brings on spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient rest, until the abscesses are healed; then arise the limb in warm oil, and cure each part as it comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Often the jaws are dislocated sideways, and the dislocations on both sides occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their places and made somewhat softer; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the ear, and block the saliva from the mouth so he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, wrapping his tongue with the word.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to place through natural means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if the dislocation is complete and thorough, you must reset it quickly without delay; and in such a manner that the attendant holds the patient's head, and places some moistened cloths from one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation involves both sides; and the other hand should support evenly. Instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And you place the joint evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to bring back, even if it is the two mandibles together, then soak them in hot water and oil, and gently reset them; do not press hard when resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well, then apply a moist dressing in a paste made of rose oil and wax. Then tie it loosely with soft threads. Let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two cushions so that it cannot move left or right, nor try to chew. Instead, give them light food until the pain is gone, and secure the mandibles; then let him eat lightly as he wishes, without forcing his mouth open for eating and drinking, until the mandible is well set and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandible bones cannot be reset to place within an hour and are not fully returned to their sockets, then fevers and stiffness become accustomed, and by chance there may be intestinal paralysis, and by chance vomiting of black bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is fatal; many times those who suffer from it die within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate the lower rib within the continuation of the bone and is only dislocated once at the fracture, and one can feel this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back and stretches out their arms. Then press the bone firmly to your palm, and it will return; thereafter apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it. The head near the cut cannot be dislocated; if only slightly, and if it is dislocated once, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed. Thus, the head of the shoulder is brought back when it is displaced from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: the first is when it dislocates at the socket's bottom; and the second is at the back of the pit; and by chance it dislocates above, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates from below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, as it jumps quickly in them; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps with strength and returns with strength.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men through a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must test it thoroughly until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known the dislocation when it goes toward the socket, and you make a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a basin at the head of the shoulder, and beneath the socket at the toucher the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the sick one cannot bring its hand to its nose, nor move by any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the toucher; and this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new, or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his palms underneath the armpit, and displaces the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister lifts his hand and extends it upwards, then puts it under; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said by hand a few days later, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply soothing and relaxing applications, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and marigold in water, and apply them. Then the patient's back should be shaved, and a piece of woolen cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the armpit; then place the patient's heel on the cloth, and lift the shoulder blade properly, and pull the patient's hand upwards; and another minister should hold the patient's head downwards so that it does not move. This shoulder will return to its proper position immediately, and if you find it necessary to reset it in this manner: then make sure a person larger than the patient is present; and place them upright against the side, and insert the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs from the arm; and another minister should pull the patient's hand downwards towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he may add something heavy to him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the dislocation is also reduced in another manner: and it is such that one sticks a long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be as round as a pelt, neither too large nor too small; then it is placed under the patient, but it has a sleeve at the top, and the patient's arm should be extended downward from another direction firmly; and the joint will return to its place quickly. And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take a poker two arm lengths long and four fingers wide, which has a head round enough to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind above the head of the rod under, so that the rod does not bruise the patient, then place it under the armpit; and stretch out your arm above the long rod, and bind the shoulder to the rod, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a step of a ladder wide, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from another side: the joint will now recover gradually.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in whatever manner that may be, you must place under the armpit a pad of wool equal, then apply the plaster mixed with powder of grindstone, with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then remove the pad accordingly, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and wrap the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be eaten little, so that the limb becomes strengthened, for it will heal faster; and thereafter eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, it must be treated with three cauteries at intervals, as is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift the arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint was never set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations in the hip and breasts, or behind, are caused by impulse and extension of hands; and they are treated until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is pain in the limb, and delay with movement, the patient should take bath many times until that pain subsides, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind. The dislocation is not replied to, for one can see it clearly and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, you must see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as abscesses form and come to head. For if abscesses form and come to head, it would be grievous to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back entirely, especially when it is at the rear. It is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such, when it can be reset, that you extend its hand with both your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands on either side of the cut, front and back, and apply pressure to the joint at its edges or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes the root of the palm cut which is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with their hands, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm in all directions, then wrap it tightly in a double long and wide cloth; and when the minister joins the joint to his hand, anoint with any oil to soften the joint, then form the joint properly until it returns; and when it is in its place, put on a dry plaster with egg yolk, and hold the arm at the neck of the patient, and let it lie for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly set in its place, untie the bandage and leave it off; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave them on for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels injured after the reset of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved; or you can place a fat sheep tallow on the joint for one day and one night, then remove it and let the plaster in. When it sweats, thoroughly rub the joint, then put the tallow back on, and let it soak in the bath; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, place heated moist horse fat with butter on it, then apply it; it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand becomes more severe, and the return is light, less than other joints. Whenever it is dislocated, one must reset it quickly, within the hour it became dislocated, just as the joint swells or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is as follows: you place the injured hand on a table, extend the fingers of the helper's hand, and position their palm equally so that it touches the appearance of the joint. Hold until it returns to its proper place. You must ensure it is correctly set; then, place the back of the injured hand on the table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and the attendant place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	And if it returns now, that is well. If not, apply a plaster to calm the abscess and let it be so until it begins again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint remains twisted; and it does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; there is no other means of treating it except by cauterizing near the case, and by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is any swelling, apply hot liquid grease and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm's center; then straighten the finger, and hold the dislocation with your fingers until it returns to place. Then support the thumb of the finger, and push it towards the part where it is disjoined; and let it be 2 days, and then make it equal on that day; and do not bind it as we have said, and unbind it daily, and allow it to move, and rebind it at night; and do this often until it is tightly set. If it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, do so as you did before until it heals. Do the same if it is dislocated in any other part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no point in treating it, as death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the vomit leaps without desire, neither can it be held, and often they soften some limb, or both hips, or both arms. And often the shoulder blade changes in four parts; that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood: there is no cure nor healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say they have no real benefit in all cases; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit that comes before the pis, there is no health; and so it is with that which comes directly into two sides, and one cannot cure it except that which comes to the back, as I say. And it is that the patient be stretched evenly on his back, and have a strain beneath him, that he does not stiffen; then stick a coal at the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie one string under the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two coals; and may their hands be well closed, the coal as we have said, and the martyr place his palms on the spine firmly until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, take a board of three spans long, place it under the wall, and if the patient is on their side, put the head of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and have the patient's feet on the other head of the board, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, do so at the wheel that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you place two coals in the head of the patient's arm with one hand, and near the feet with the other, and between each coal, underneath and above, place a palm of long spice; and in each coal, let there be a hole, or where the wheel runs, and let the coals be firmly set in the ground so they do not move; and between each two coals, have one turning coal on which the thread turns, and have two small coals of a palm's length for turning the wheel; and then tie the thread that is among the spindles to the wheel near the head, and the other thread near the feet to the other wheel, and each attendant turns their wheel with the thread, and the master keeps the spine level as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are equal, apply a desiccative plaster with abundant egg, and then the stoppers, and then place a piece of three long fingers of linen that purifies the muscle from fatiness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient for gradual healing until they are healed; and if any thing comes at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the poultice that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of flax, and sometimes the appearance in the rear spine of the back indicates dislocation; and this is the bone that appears, so one must not presume anything: by chance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come about only from dislocations, not in the same way as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: internally and externally, in front and behind; more internally it is more so, and less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of a dislocation internally is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and more clearly the injured knee appears larger than the healthy one, and the injured knee cannot bend at all; this is because the head of the femur comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens is that these accidents are contrary to those mentioned above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom these happen in advance are that his leg is well positioned; nevertheless, he cannot bend his knee without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot do so and retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he goes, he passes over his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom these happen later are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the site below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this resemblance of dislocation is that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains in its position, then there is no need for any treatment; and it must not have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that which concerns the fresh dislocation, and this is of four kinds of dislocation, you must hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it right and left; by chance it will return, and has no need of further care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or at the place where it is tied above the knee; and another assistant extend his hand above in such a way that he places his hands under its armpits, then tighten it with a bandage around the thigh; and another holds the head of the injured person; and they extend both upwards and downwards at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for the four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not so, it is necessary to treat with its similarity. If the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, you must soothe the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and below the angle, then position the bandage upwards towards the angle and the forcelet; then have another minister grasp his arms, and embrace the large muscle of the affected thigh, and extend it firmly: it will now return to its place; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage above the ankles and knees, and let the affected leg be extended twice as much as the other; then hang it from the top of a stake, and extend its arms long on either side. Then command the minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and have another minister hanging along with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint is now returning quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at fault, the patient lies down, as we have said in that which has gilbositeit, and extract the vein properly above the bad leg, and also on the ankle; then place two torches, one at the head and the other at the foot, then insert the torch between the thighs of the bad limb in the form; and plant moist cloths around, so that it does not blister the bad limb, then extend each minister towards him, and the eyes put equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	And if it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	And if not, place it on the table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the good side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, it must be stretched the bad leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the palm of the hand above the bad knee, then press with the other hand, stretching downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is to the side, it must not be stretched downward or lifted from the ground, but rather placed as if the hip were dislocated to the side, as we have said in the躺卧两髋关节部分; and place it on its side, with the ligament stretched as we said before, and press on the joint at the table; it will be right when the patient extends his legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and secure with a bandage so that the hips do not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release it and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, secure as before and leave it for three days; then release it, and allow it to heal properly until the limbs are strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee can be dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not settle against the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his thigh, and put his foot on yours; then take his knee with your palms, and pull gently between your hands, and bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and have other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that his leg settles lightly against the thigh; and apply the plaster, and warm the leg at the thigh, and tie them tightly for three or four days, then release the bindings; and do not allow the patient to move much until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is sometimes injured, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and displaced forward to the part where it is dislocated: the displacement is slight, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only injured.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you must seat the patient upright, and have the attendants hold him by the leg above the ankle. Then pull the foot toward your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then extend it upward, and firmly place the foot in position. Do this twice as we have said, pulling and stretching the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, restart the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the earth between his thighs, binding him tightly with bandages so as not to displace the patient. Then have the attendants hold his thigh, and others extend the foot by their hands or at the ankle, securing it above the foot's neck; then equally stretch each attendant, and the stake should be fastened between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when it is extended; then place your fingers on either side of the dislocation with your hands, and have others hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will quickly return to its proper position.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is in place, put the plaster and stops on it, then draw out the splint, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight; then let it be for two or three days, and as the ties loosen, remove the splint; then unbind at the third or fourth day, and defend the patient from walking for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not safety that he will dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses arise, you must relieve them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When they are dislocated, you must beautifully extend them with effort, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, you must seat the patient on a firm bench or on a II. table completely straight, and place his foot on what stands out from these joints, then press firmly on his foot until it returns; and when it is equal and nothing stands out, put a shoulder-blade under the sole of the foot, then hold firmly, and leave for three days, then release; and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you see it healing, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not all-wise and merciful and slow; and use at the beginning soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient to God if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place as the hot abscesses begin to subside; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and cure the wound as it should be with drying ointments; and if there is a fracture with small broken bones, remove them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and guard against entering the way of fear according to what I have said, for this will bring you trouble according to your Creator, and because of the knowledge that arms and bodies should have.
Amen	Amen
