O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, most dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science knowledge together with its explanation, and I have concluded it through its expositions and statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this part 'chirurgery', which is the work of hands.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has spread throughout all, it has been perverted from its original science and purpose, with only small descriptions remaining in books written by ancient ones who have moved on to other matters.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises errors and foolishness, and understanding is shut off and knowledge has been misled.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And it seems to me that I shall revive this together with the administration of this treatise according to the method of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and come together with the forms of caustic implements, and other instruments for surgery, along with the adjustment of explanation and preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been displaced.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those who intervene to be well-versed in anatomy, as Galen says, understanding the judgment of limbs, their forms and connections and separations, having knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of veins, the movements and flowing vessels and resting ones, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates states that the mind is greatly important, while with the hand it is less so; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that those who do not understand the things afore mentioned should be careful not to err and cause harm; for I have seen many times how others involved in this science abandon reason and sense experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	In my view, a mad barber made an incision in an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and cut the arteries on the neck; so much blood came out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another barber treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a part of the bladder, and within three days the man died.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been summoned to attend him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he was cut into it would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	This physician took charge of another case involving a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was also an open wound; the ignorant doctor manipulated the fracture near the wound with considerable force, without giving any support to the wound itself, resulting in such outcome. He instructed him not to allow it to dislocate again; he remained like this until the leg had fully healed and returned to normal function before leading to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon and came to him quickly, and hurriedly went to dislocate the leg; and when I saw it had been dislocated so far, it was in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the contamination had already taken hold of the limb and could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another mirror which fell upon an advanced abscess, and then inflamed by the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is free of black bile humor, one must not touch it with iron unless it's partially there so that all corrupted matter can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: one being where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Thus it is necessary that you take care of them so that the foolish may not speak ill of you; if you take your arms in action, and address the sickly easily and firmly, using the best course through God's grace you come to salvation and are praised; and let go of diseases with hopeful healing; and remove your armor so that doubt does not befall you, and have faith within yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Do not take in care any ill disease, lest you be called foolish by others.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter concerns fire and medicinal cauldrons of water, and is ordered from the head to the feet; as well as forms of tumors, ferrumens of cauldrons, and all that is necessary in its use.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and trimming, as well as cupping and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapter is ordered and includes forms of tumors.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisted limbs, as well as similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, including forms of tumors.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the nature of the aid and harm from each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the nature of aid and harm is the longest word and subtle science and hidden solutions; and on this many wise ones spoke, and agreed with it; but their words are few to me, for I return its lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps all constitutions where there is matter; for two kinds of constitutions exist: those that are hot and sensitive to material, and those that are dry and sensitive to material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the complexion of heat and dryness together, they agree that fire cautery is greatly helpful; but others say otherwise: that cautery has no value in diseases arising from excessive warmth and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with heat or dryness in illnesses caused by warmth, nor inherently; but those who say otherwise claim that cautery provides great help to diseases characterized by heat and dryness within men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body and its moisture in relation to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I heed this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found no instance through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	For all the diverse conditions and diseases and their occurrences of which we have often seen in our experience.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the cures and has greater kindness than medicinal burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	les doue;d eucht sus they tost Cler.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medicines come from one limb to another through alignment, and bring serious diseases of the body for healing; and by chance it kills the patient due to its potency and the goodness of its substance does not act without excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it lies in the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from verbosity because I do not wish that you should know the secret either by word or by deed, as the philosopher demonstrates. Now take this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they are done at times when cauterizations should be made, and purulent abscesses.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all cases, because the damage occurrerening is due to removal by cauterization; and especially if the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And ail; and ce cuidant parce est cite; car nes li is qui pourteler les cure of the cest en tant qu’auteret pendent que il sient lee lor. L'ad, si it d est ad de sorent la, et li messe, ail nus and est tout les mules cuent ce qui et esoie, andre ome that celié etes the chauz.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And one may find that the disease occurs at any time according to the constitution of the sick person and the nature of their ailment and its vitality; and there are excesses gathered in them through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered on-site where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and other such matters, where no great pain returns; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and that is true; but they falsely believe that caustics have no value after medicine, and their understanding is flawed because when we administer treatment methods in any illness and they prove to be worthless, then we apply our caustics, and they do.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is well understood that caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that surgical instruments made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, attributing this to the quality of gold and its substance's value; they stated that the wound from a cauterization does not cause putrefaction but is indeed beneficial as I have tested it, finding in some individuals that it works. Cauterizations with gold are more effective than those with iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case when you heat an instrument made of gold, it is not due to the color of the gold, and cools down quickly; if overheated, it causes burns; thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery in our work as has been proven effective to us.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from the neck down to the feet, so that it may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	To the olive oil caustic
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These caustics are for moisture and coldness on the brain; there are two ways to perform it due to a disease called "soda," as well as from many humors descending from the head, ears, causing multitude of dreams and pain in teeth and throat, mainly to all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, etc.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	the p arles sargent: Andres.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his legs crossed between your hands, and place your hands on either side of his thighs; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever you see come his leg muscles, bleed first before warming up the cautery called "olivare," which is shaped as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then place the leap mark with ink, and draw and stretch your hand slightly while turning it back and forth; then lift your hand gently, and where you see the bone protruding a little piece of skin; if you do not see this, continue using the cautery until you can see the bone as I have instructed you; afterwards take some ointment, and apply it to warm and soft cotton inside, and place it on the leap mark, leaving it for three days; after that, cover with fine cloth soaked in butter; let it remain until the burning subsides; afterwards treat the wound with an ointamet called "tetrafarmacon," until healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the old ones say that when the wound remains open for longer, it cleanses better; and therefore apply medication to it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that the caustic should be used sparingly when a part of the bone has been burnt, and then reset what is burned from the bone, and treated accordingly.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the caustic should be applied generously, and pressed hard enough to flatten the bone as wide as the wool women put in their shoes so that the humors can flow outwardly; and one must treat the open wound for a long time afterwards, then heal it and bandage.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of caustication do not seem to me to be entirely good for everyone; but rather it should be left in some cases where fear is present. I also find that the shoulder joints are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we have witnessed in other limbs; similarly, when the shoulder of a sick person is naturally weak, and the first sign of caustication is more beneficial and effective for me, then from such use I work accordingly for health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Pain from anguish grips the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; if they undergo the cautery we have previously mentioned, it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be mindful that the patient's head is of a serious condition and not too cold; then you should cauterize below the previously mentioned cautery, just as we have described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	s.
dou cautere dou chief	Of fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and illness extends to the neck, and the head is purged with cleansing medicines, and other treatments as previously mentioned for diseases have been done, but none help: then you make fire cauteries according to two manners, that is, with medicine for ague and with fennel.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery for ague is to take a piece of alum as wide as two finger's breadth, and peel off the bark and cover it with two grains of pitch; then form the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the piece of alum under the skin; and when it has been replaced well and left like this for sixteen hours; and then remove the bandage and scrape off the alum, leaving the wound as is for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until suppuration occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see, apply any of the burning medicines I have written or listed in my treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is used in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the shape of which we are speaking:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole or has .i. small bump, and at one end there's a slight bulge with a small opening; place it on the painful spot, hold your hand steady, and gently turn the fiery part, until half of the pointed tip becomes red-hot; then remove your hand allowing an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter on it; and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellaris," at the tip, and avoid sealing the artery in this migraine which is not an acute one.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migraines as we have previously described in divisions of diseases and it does not work, and you see that the cautery before mentioned by the medicine and iron is not sufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellaris" until it becomes white; and with such a hand, gently press half an hour on the sore area, and remove your hand once, and pull straight so as not to seal the artery or reach bone; and beware of the lower jaw that moves when chewing, and ensure that nerves do not have direct contact but rather move together with the skin and that spasms do not affect the patient, and be wary of bleeding from the sealed artery if it becomes blocked, or if blockage is feared; leave a small opening in place. However, I will tell you how to restore blood flow when an artery has been sealed, and I will show you where it opens herein this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that these cauterizations do not relieve the illness and the patient suffers greatly, perform cauterization in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see this, apply the cautery we have mentioned or for artery extraction with a cautery that has two blades; and this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain in the ears caused by coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from coldness, and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not subside, then warm this cautery called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing around the entire ear of the patient, where both sides feel pain, and moving slightly above the root of the ear after finding its place again; and have six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
de la torture de la bouche	For the treatment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with a caustic is only those caused by moisture, as we have said in the classification of diseases; and do not apply caustic to similar ones coming from sores and spittle from glands.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torment that causes swelling from worms and purging, gargling, it's not effective, then you must perform three cauterizations on the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a bit further back towards the temple, and the third in the corner near the inner lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, and direct the cautery to the top of the ear just below a bit past the tip, with another on the temple as long as a finger's width; leave the cautery until half the skin becomes scorched; this is the method for the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the type of cut that we have described before, but it is slightly more subtle and the knife should be somewhat larger; after resetting it as I have previously explained, until it heals.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When treating an early apoplexy as we have described and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you must perform four cauterizations: two on each of the two angles of the head, one in the middle of the forehead, and one at the area called "vessels" as we have previously said, and another above the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have described before.
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness requires giving the patient large years and purging medicines to clear the brain; afterwards, remove the chief of the ailment entirely, and place upon the occiput a hemp poultice as written or taught in poultice treatments; here is the method of cautery: do so as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus, well done; and if not, do the following: make three cauteries below the head down to the neck with an interval of two fingers between each one; treat as you have learned for others, and if you see a need, place another in the middle; and if necessary, two others on either horn, and treat until well; and it is the caustery called 'olivary', as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of dirt and as we have previously said; after washing the patient's head, then make a fire cautery on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, so make four cauteries along the spine of the back; let it be until the most yellowish flesh appears, then remove your hand; afterward care for it until it heals, and apply the caustic called "olivare" that we have previously said.
de l’epilempsie	concerning epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should only use iron fire-cautery if they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to soften the brain with other treatments we have mentioned in the section when patients are greatly suffering and resistant to medical care.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure the treatment, they shall do gargling and chewing to soothe the brain often with bone meats; afterward, the head is milled, followed by one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the vessel, and each horn. And if the patient is greatly suffering and resistant, they shall be cauterized as I have instructed for those with paralysis and softening of limbs at the spine between the neck and back, and it should be an olive-wood cautery according to my method described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, they shall receive a subtle cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then the fire caustic of parts that we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy, and the body is weakly moist, then give it to drink something so that the brain may be clarified, according as it stands in the part of the head's division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the patient is reigned; after one makes a well-made tether, like a circle, put it within the head; and let the patient be crossed with branches, and held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, and anoint with butter from old sheep's wool; and warm up the fire quickly so that the patient can endure it; afterward empty the circle from inside the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each sick person once a week with other good governance until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see that it should be cauterized by making several points with the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly; and then apply cotton soaked in butter and hazel grease on top.
de l’awe des eulz	From the edge of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	Firstly, when the signs I have mentioned in the division appear with respect to the eyes, then begin and give the patient something that purifies the head, and protects from all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to raise his head again, and he makes a cautery in the middle of the forehead, and he makes two cauterizations on top of the two temples where the nerves of the temple are at both eyes together, or in one they may be located; close all veins and arteries with the cautery that come from above the crown, making it long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood loss, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making incision how to staunch it; never do a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	on dou corps des larmes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed to staying on the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and one sees they are from cold, watery excesses, then you do the cautery as I said at the beginning in the descending part for the eyes: i.e., a cauterization under the forehead, ii. cauterizations above the two temples, and ii. cauterizations or haiterel below the two bones; and if more is needed, you carefully cauterize just a small area over each eyebrow.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When tears fill within the body of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three drinks of a medicinal wine; afterward, do a fire cautery or olive oil caustic on his head, and two "clavilis" cauterizations above each eyebrow, slightly below the brow bones; and be careful to avoid cutting into the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery, which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then one uses this caustic called "Olivara.
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is why this occurs:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries above the two sores that are similar to eyelashes; do not leave the hand except until one-third of the skin is burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	If there:t in English: This:
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At no time do the eyelash hairs turn into scales and touch the eye, and it is treated with cautery in two ways: that of fire or burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Once the hairs have grown and are even, then put the patient in a bed; make sure there is enough space for the eyelids to be as wide as one's cheek, and the beginning of the scar should resemble that near the hairs. Then place cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk essence on the eye.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the wound you have made little by little many times, let the skin be scorched at that spot; and signs of healing in the wound are when you see the paper recede, and hairs rise to the length of oil; then take your hand off, and leave it for iii days, then apply softened cotton with butter until the burn is gone; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards hairs come in and the paper is softened as before, then continue cauterizing at that same spot; and if the hair fails, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural place, and they are even, and do not touch the oil part.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fire cautery of medical use is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle leaves, then take French soap and hot wax, one-third each, and grind them together well; and do it quickly before it cools, then apply it over the form as you made like myrtamolet leaves, and put on paper. And if the disease holds in just a single bone only, work on just one, and so forth; and put cotton moistened with oil underneath. And the patient's head should be kept clean, and place your two fingers showing over the medicine, and press slightly every time the patient feels the tingling of the medicine, as it is like fire burning.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, give yourself the proper medication.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the swelling is gone, lift the limb upwards and check if you see a paper mark as though it were raised by pressure or incision; and if so, that's good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, apply more medicine to the limb or if the medicine hasn't worked yet, maintain uniformity in your approaches and positioning of the eyes; then cover with cotton wool soaked in oil until the scab forms, followed by curing the limb with anointment called "dyafenis" and other ointments as needed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And you must carefully guard your approach with great vigilance so that the medicine does not drip from the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the parchment becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the skin, resume the medicine on that spot which has been weakened by the parchment properly, as you did beforehand; heal it until it is healthy again; this is the method of using fine cloth:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to this let there be constraints; and do not return the right path to those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Regarding the treatment of a fistula by fire.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not prove effective, then it is necessary for you to perform a fire cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	by bonstrat, and the t.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the pus and dryness; and if it is closed, work on it, and rub hard over the bow; after placing a hot caustic there properly, hold your hand to the caustic near the sensitive area above the oil, so that your hands do not go mad; place the caustic in the fat of the oil, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If at the beginning of the fire cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, resume the fire cautery once more if needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards apply cotton wool soaked in butter, and treat with drying ointment until healthy again; after forty days when bone is exposed, apply corrosive medicine as described in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for fistulas which none of the ancient ones spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Begin with a fistula, and feel its location; then place within the opening a subtle instrument whose form is this:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it the quantity of one ounce; and hold your hand or whatsofter firmly, so that the patient does not move an inch, until the lead has melted into its place; and then you must put cotton wool moistened with a little water on top: if the lead is correctly placed there by a fistula, it will heal miraculously quickly.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then it is necessary to administer a pin at the nose, and draw the fistula back into its proper place on the body according to where it belongs.
des crevaices en levres	Of cracks in the lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are ruptures in lips called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these ruptures as we have described in sections, and the remedy does not help, then apply a small cautery lance according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply heat quickly to those ruptures until the wound is closed; then cleanse the area with cerate until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	by. i wonder et the there, and ch. If you have:20s.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or around the roots of the teeth, after it has undergone decay and growth and becomes old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have described in sections, but it does not heal: then it is necessary for you to have a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after cutting or opening the faster of the fistula, and hold your hand until the fire comes to its end, and afterwards there; and do so once or twice, after treating as we have described in treatments, until it is healthy; if treated thusly, it is good; but if not, then you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	With slight movements of the teeth.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are weakened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat with medicines and this does not work: then place the head of the patient in his health; after cooling off the cautery as follows so that you put a cone on the tooth; and insert into the cone within the dent heats up quickly, and hold the hand until warmth comes to the root of the teeth; afterwards remove your hand and re-cautere according to desire; after wash his mouth with salted water, and rinse one hour and ache.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth which was moving is fixed, and the gums are made soft and tight, and the infected moisture dried out.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is cold and wind, and medical remedies are not effective, then it needs treatment by caustic methods: caustic butter and fire caustic.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take the butter from a cow, and the tip into an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and the fur in butter melts, and put on the sore tooth quickly; thus do so often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see hair and cotton melted with butter cooled, then apply it to the painful tooth, and cover with a hot iron until the heat reaches closure around the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The fire cautery set together is such that you can grasp a bone or reed of iron or glass, and make it thick enough so the flames do not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, its shape will come to be as follows, and place it under the tongue and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will diminish on that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of that fire cautery, and then quickly remove it; this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Do a cauterization on the eyebrow that you wish, and according to what you can manage; and this is the form of the incision:
des scrophules	;t:
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the scrofula is of cold humors and medicines do not aid digestion, then apply the hot iron cautery from which comes afterward this form; it should have two openings for smoke to escape on the other side of the cautery; heat the abscess once with the cautery, or as needed until reaching the edge of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to its quantity and leave it thus for three days; place cotton soaked in butter oil until there is no discharge; afterwards cleanse the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the cauliflower:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When moisture overwhelms the channels of the forehead and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first purge the patient with solvent medicines; after that perform a cauterization at the root of the throat, and be sure not to reach near the throat but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward perform another cauterization at the joint of the neck and spine's head, and be it the "clavile" cauterization which we have seen before; treat the issue as we have previously mentioned until it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the upper jaw are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an early disease: one should place two cauterizations on either side in front of the eyes; another cauterization between the nipples; and there is a cauterization called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see it, perform a puncturing cauterization at all the "points" which are called thus in the ear disease as we have seen before; let them be up to XXX or around there.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the limb as previously described, apply the fire cautery thrice according to this method:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And thus is the fire cautery lighter, for you make it three times over.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the disaster.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	Et perform the cautery on his cheek until it is pierced to its bone, and then apply together four cauterizations; and thus cautery is made with the cautery tool having three points, which is why the pattern of cauterization consists of these four cauterizations: and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery tool that has three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time are placed near this one nerve where there are eight cauterizations;
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery near it with wool; then allow the patient to rest and do not move their limbs for long periods until they are well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated again above, a small thing happens then make fire cautery on the thickness of a caulicle, or many fires touching.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is put back in place, and there is swelling and relief for the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach coldness and much moisture come so frequently that they affect his nature, and there are many catharsis for him, and with usual remedies it does not help, then it is necessary for the sickly to be laid on their back, and stretch out legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After this, make three fire cauteries below the gallblader for a quantity of two grains each at all clavicles, and four cauteries forward from the ribs until they form angles at three points, with space between them so that they do not touch when turning towards indigestion; and let the cauteries be placed in such a way that they prick both parts of the throat, and their formation follows this pattern without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see that a large fire cautery is needed in the stomach according to this pattern; and for those who fear this cautery, place it by gripping and pressing above the stomach at one point based on the amount seen of indigestion; then place the entirety of the cauterization called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound we have had before it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the pain of cold and dampness and excessive bloating occurs in the liver, altering its natural condition due to superfluities; the patient is treated as we have described in divisions, but it does not benefit them. Therefore, the patient should be bled at their appropriate body part according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the epigastric region where ribs come together; there should be space equivalent to an inch between each cauterization. The cauterizations should be long and along the entire body, without pressing too hard throughout the process; they should only burn slightly halfway into the skin, and the patient should lie correctly on their feet; if unable, they should lie down with legs extended and raise their arms. This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 If you wish, if you cauterize the cutaneous cauldrons, provided you are skilled and wise in the art, and ensure that you do not burn the entire body, as this would dry out the whole corpus; and it does not reach to a boil, for the flesh is very delicate at that spot, and he knows how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it's in the flesh or tissue of the liver: if it's in the flesh, the patient feels severe pain but not too much; and if it's in the tissue, they feel sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this wound-treatment requires bandages, it is necessary that the patient be elevated on their head; then bind down the area or the abscess where it is located, and then heat the cauterizing instrument, which resembles a rod:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And in the use of fire cauterization until the core is burned away, and it reaches to the membrane beneath, until all sores are healed; after this treatment according to the method for draining pus as long as they are healthy; and only those skilled through long study in the art of medicine should perform this cauterization, which has caused these diseases at no time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then it is difficult to work on, but I always seem to leave them unfinished.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery on a pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy one should perform root cauteries of aristologiae in this manner: take the longest possible root of an aristology plant, dry and prepare it to be as thick and long as your fingers; coat with oil and hold over fire, then cauterize. One cautery between the clavicle and collarbone, two small ones slightly descending on the part above the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth vertebrae, declining backward a bit; one in front of the pelvis, another over the stomach, and one between the arms' inner sides. Two others at the lower costae, and one where lies the root placed between them; do not press with your hand but perform as if smelling an odorant.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancient ones say that no man should use the fire cauterization as if it were a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until an abscess forms; then it causes great pain, as we have said in the case of an abscess on the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear that the patient dies now, or a fistula develops which cannot be healed.
de la mice	An ancient one declared that no man should employ a fire cautery resembling a razor, and warm it then positioning it betwixt ribs until an abscess is reached; thus follows severe pain, as we've noted in the liver abscess instance. Yet within this craft there lies dread or mortality for the patient presently, or a fistula arises which cannot be cured.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have mentioned in the division of treatments, and it proves ineffective, then there are three methods of fire cautery that all prove beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are several ways to perform these cauterizations: either do three or four cauterizations in line with the length of the wound, following the design of the liver cautery that we have previously described; and do not press your hand on all the cauteries at once, keeping the patient lying down on their back; and another method for cauterization is as follows: heat a cautery with two nails, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation treatment; lift the flesh where the wound's edges meet or if the malady't sides lean towards the left, and perform elevations while lifting the skin according to the size of the body, and let the cauteries be proportionate to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced from the other side, then apply the fire cautery and thus there will be four; if you see this, cauterize with the entire cautery on three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when it has acquired pus for long periods, this means moving as the other treatments previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	Dropsy (edema)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cauterization is not used for epilepsy, but in the manner called "asclythes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the buttocks, and one above the stompit, and another over the liver, and one over the kidney, and two behind the back near the spine, and one at the end of the genitals; and let the cauters be close to the place where it hurts.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the open wound to heal for long periods of time, and do not cease treating the patient after cauterization; and healing will occur quickly, and both intentions (healing and curing) shall be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of fire treatment for the abdomen should be the spatula we have previously shown; and that for the back should be oval-shaped, as it is here before illustrated.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of sores
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the fingers are swollen in someone who is jaundiced and full of pale yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back above the heel between the little finger and ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery as you turn away.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go in too deep, thus closing channels for the pale yellow bile, and apply the cautery as follows according to this method:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	by ;
de la menoison	Of fainting
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of stomach comes from cold and moisture, while the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are bloated, they cannot be treated by ordinary methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality. Thus, one should perform a major cautery on the stomach according to what was previously mentioned or stomach cautery, where cauterization circulates around it; four subtle cauteries about the mouth (orifice), each as subtle as needle cauterization, and two over the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, perform cautery on the finger, and one cauterization on each joint, and two small cauterizations near the stomach beside the major one, because the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	Treatment of boils
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hernias are numerous or foundational, old and composed of large cold and damp corrupted humors, treated as we have said in sections, and there is no benefit without cauterization: III on the spine of the back, that which is all behind beyond the almighty point and a little in a triangular shape, and I cauterization below the chest two fingers; and if you think its stomach has cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling on the face, then make a large cautery on the stomach as previously described, and another on the liver, and another at the groin with all the sharp cauteries; leave the cautery in place for long periods.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the joint until it is whole again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chilblain called "theolon"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the chilblain (athelul), if you feel weakened and appear pale, apply a fire-heated iron as soon as possible over it; let your hand rest near the vein's origin until blood flows from it, which will stop the bleeding; do this once or twice. If there is much chilblain, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward apply healing ointments until they are well-healed; and if you use a large iron for cupping (athelul), it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound badly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, we will describe in detail, if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When any wound becomes an ulcer and is infected with rot and corrupted by moisture, you must provide thorough care for the entire tent, and ensure that it does not grow in size at all.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After applying the fire cautery to smooth out scars and inserting it into the ulcer according to the amount that has entered, continue with the cautery until the body is healed, once or twice or three times depending on the amount of wound needing attention; and be careful not to burn any nerves or major veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the ulcer reaches the bladder or intestine, take care of these veins and do not force anything in just one spot, and think that it is not a gangrenous condition; after curing the wound until it is whole again, if the veins are perished and materials have been removed for a long time then know that the entire vein is healthy again; and if materials have not been removed, understand that the vein is swollen, and the bone at its root has decayed; thus with either of these conditions as we described in the wound.
de la maladie des reins	Concerning kidney disease:
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of cold comes with severe swelling and loss of desire, then one should make a cautery on both sides of the groin with the pointed cauterizer we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, which will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	Concerning the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is hard and cold with moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, one should make a cautery on the part behind the bladder where hair begins at the fingertips; there will be two cauteries to each side, as long as needed; and also one cauterization along the back, or two if necessary; and use the pointed cauterizer according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	Of a dislocation
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist and cannot produce due to this condition, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation, causing great pain when they do arrive: then it is necessary for you to make .iii. cauterizations around the scrotum as we have said about the bladder cauterization, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the third cautery be on the groin, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend into the buttock box, and for this reason it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the large intestine veils the exit of feces are found, so you must cauterize the patient over the buttock box with a cautery resembling a circle, and position it as the area turns, ensuring the box is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, use three large olive oil cauldrons, and let the cauters be as broad as all the keys; and continue until it is cleaned thoroughly.
de la dolor de la hainche	For pain in the buttock
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the region of the thigh, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in the division and treatment does not help, and the illness is longstanding: then you must purge the sick person of large humors with foul pills or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing the cautery, the manner of cauterization has two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cauterization has many methods, one of which is as follows: that you make triangular caustic burns according to this shape on the thigh's blister, and make it deep and large, with space between each caustic equal to the size of a thumb, and be an olive-shaped cauter. Never done within the middle of the head of the hip, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see it after performing the cauterization of the circle we have mentioned earlier for the shoulder dislocation; but do so in such a way that the circle encompebles the entire thigh, and all sides are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And the method is done in sciatica when pain holds on to the thigh and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it reaches the thigh and leg, if the patient says the pain is there, make the cautery where they indicate the pain, four on the ankle with one to the left; and be the incision for calluses, and remove the thickness of skin as much as possible; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two or three fingers below the knee or near it, cauterize where they feel the pain, using three or four points from the cautery known as "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the work is not done properly and there is more pain; and if it has been since the pain moved from below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with either cutaneous or circular caustic, and take good care in all your caustics that you do not harm the nerves and large arteries, causing further damage and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen others who made a cautery on the ankle below the knee, and they continued until the entire leg was emaciated, along with the foot as well, which became pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a treatment of stomach which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, perform a fire cautery on both sides as follows:
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the physicians say about hip fire cauterization, in this manner, make an iron stick as large as a small dagger or slightly less, and it should be made by rivets and span from one to the other with the quantity of a pigeon's egg; and there should be rivets over two parts, and they should also be evenly spaced, and have one well-made iron handle; this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scorched until all red and blistered, then place it on the bag of the affected haunch, and twist around its inner edge; causticate once with two cuppings alternately and leave for three days; afterwards, apply a butter poultice, leaving the open wound exposed for a long time; after treating with ointment until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says that we use little of this fire cupping due to fear in its regard, and few who use it; nonetheboute, however, it is a good fire cupping method if one can endure it, and where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The burning medical cautery is an instrument with rivets through which the edge of the wound descends, and it should be made from iron or brass of a certain length, and in its height have two notches, and between each there should be the thickness of half a finger; they are to diverge below and above, and join together as follows:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the cup of the hip on the lying patient near his side, and place your hand much over the cup; afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot wax that is heated by fire a little, and leave it for an hour at moderate heat, allowing the patient to feel warmth and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For there is also swelling like that from fire; and when the swelling subsides, raise your hand with the instrument and gently lift the hip cup, leaving it so for three days, and apply butter as long as what has turned black due to bruising heals; then leave it in such a way for three days after putting on plaster.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain has extended to the thigh or calf, you must use an instrument as in treating the hip equally; this is the method of hot poultices, and I have written about it in treatments for medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take equal parts alkali and quicklime, grind them together, and place in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 If there is a small hole to be made so that the tip of a knife can fit through; place it in another well-plated pot and put alkali and quicklime underneath, enough to cover the powders as you have finely ground them with your hand; leave like this until the hot water and smoke descend from the pots. Then take all that hot mixture and pour onto calcium carbonate, just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very swoln and treated with the dough of medical recipes and other members' cauteries, as it performs many tasks like feet, and if there are other medicines that one should well cauterize the heel, such as castor oil and mead from anacardium tree and calx mixed with soap; all these things melted together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galiens tells us of a case wherein an honorable man was healed from the pain in his heel and sciatica, saying that there were no other remedies used, and he recovered once more when this treatment was performed, as described hereafter with bathing instructions.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he instructs thus: pluck the fresh and dry Lily of the Valley, grind it quite finely with a bit of fat, apply to the heel, thigh, and leg where pain is felt, and wrap; let it remain for three hours or until the patient feels no burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter a bath to the point where his body is somewhat refreshed, and he makes himself lie down, and the pain will go away completely and be healthy again.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And understand that no one should use such remedies of fire cautery unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cautioned with ram's cheviot fat, it greatly helps; and the cauterization must be done in such manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and soak it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb's tip and the other called phylactery.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dry ram's cheviot fat and holding it over the fire until it becomes charcoal, place it on the linen, and let it remain until it turns to ash; repeat this process as long as you think by touch that it reaches up to the hip joint, and that the pain is ceased; and such methods of cauterization are called "cauterization with ram'cuet".
de la dolor dou dos	The pain of the sore back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back from falling or blows or excessive blood loss, or from cold matter spreading out - none of these cases require cauterization; rather, it is for those who come from an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other substances, place them on their back where the pain is located, in three lines marked with a dot; and in each line, perform five cauterizations or more depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can tolerate; and do the cauterization as per the 'point' technique of cauterization; and if you see it necessary, make either three or four cauterizations at the midline using this method.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	theird, t
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and observe it healing, then cauterize using a caustic dressing in the following manner:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the cautery is applied, each part of the spine must be evened out.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, with the hot iron near the spine make two or three lines and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the lump as much as possible according to what we have said, be careful not to perform caustication in a hollow area that is a mass of nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	For pain relief of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moistures spread throughout the body, and when pain occurs in the toes, which those who treat them call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be healed with medicines, then they are treated with caustics as follows: make numerous caustics around the joint of the foot, and let the caustics be olive oil according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is a need to grasp above the face of the foot, make caustication all over where we mark "no point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come close to joints and other articulations, which happens often, make caustication over each ankle with three or four cauterizations on each part, at all olive-cauterizations; but if more is needed, then do more, but do not keep your hand too far from the heat source until the desired color is achieved.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if pain spreads to the neck and back, administer the cautery as we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the elbow and two lines; and if there is no pain at the joints, place points on each joint and hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the knees or shoulders, cauterize each area, and provide good care for the patient and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be well aided by God.
de la routure dou syfac	with m: n'set20 you cite:
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When dislocation comes inwardly and the veins protrude from their vessels completely, then when you see it needs to be treated, do not wait until tomorrow; use things that stimulate his belly so the bowels descend from it. After he sits on your back between your hands, instruct him to stretch out his leg while the dislocation is repaired and the limbs are aligned with yours, then bind him up at the dislocation above the bone of the elbow, and make a full circle sign around most of his body; then apply the caustic as shown in this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and secretes clear pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then remove the pus at its place; and ensure it does not return behind him; and thoroughly treat the patient's legs, putting a cloth under and straps over the thighs, and another on his feet that tie to his hands; then apply the camoilin to the mark all across the hand, and the right thumb and index finger until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again until you have come up to the bone. Be careful that the pus does not escape when making the cautery; do not burn it; and ensure this does not cause the patient's death or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your works are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is fitting that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and similarly large for grown people in proportion to their stature; after three days heal them with a fire of butter until the burn has hardened into bone; then apply other ointments until they are well-healed, and let the patient lie on his back forty days so that the wound is fully sealed. And it should be ensured that their bandages remain long enough to prevent the veins from protruding when he rises to enter chambebres (chamber pots).
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, be well-dressed with a properly made bandage and keep it on for another forty days; have good rest, work little and protect oneself from excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting; then the instruction is complete.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will now describe afterwards the treatment of tailors in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the abdominal region
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When thread heads come in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make the fire cautery return according to its quantity, leaving one-third of its length; after curing as we have said; and none of the ancients have stated that it should be cauterized at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first sign the beginning of the thread and draw lines for width above the head, and another below, and hold your hand all over the burning spike.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 However, the first fire cautery is lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medical treatment is not effective, then it must be cauterized with a fire caster called "spike," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and degree of pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; otherwise, if not, begin another cautery on that, because it is customary for the member to move away from where it was originally close, so you must perform cauterizations as long as the patient remains unhealthy.
de meselerie	In pharmacy
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The spleen is often helped by cauterization with great assistance, particularly diseases that arise from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you not attempt to cauterize it, but beware if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have described in the division, and does not progress or last long, then there is doubt that corruption may affect the entire ailment; thus, perform four cauterizations on the head: one near the crown, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two behind the ears, and another just above the jawbone; and allow enough for your hand to reach until it nears the bone, and continue until cuts come out so that vapors from large humors can escape.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the infection is widespread and clearly evident, then it should be treated with the cauterization techniques we have mentioned previously; and a small cautery that does not burn too deeply, and two on the spine of the neck, and five on the back spine, and one large one near the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade, and two on the ribs, and two over the elbow tendons, and one for each joint of hands and feet, and over the palm creases; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind pressing, and never cauterize directly on the bone of the finger or stomach, nor on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you perform cauterization, the greater aid it provides, and benefits the patient; and understand that the sickly do not feel pain from cauterization as healthy people do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it must be that the cauterization be great or small according to limbs and joints, depending on how you will find them in handling iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the body with a poultice of beef fat mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When a swelling comes in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it still isn't healed, then you must perform cauterization on the limb according to its size; make the cauterization somewhat translucent as if looking through leather. Then treat with oil until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 At any time, cautery is done on the hand and foot and back when a nerve causes immobility in a limb, and thus it becomes swollen; however, no one intervenes unless they are familiar with the limbs and the movement of the nerves throughout the body.
de albaras	The text describes a condition called "albares" or "gout," which is an affliction that causes painful swelling in joints due to uric acid crystals. It occurs commonly at night, with the big toe being affected most often but can affect other parts of the body as well.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the condition known as "gout" becomes chronic, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then cauterize with a cautery slightly on the surface, according to the quantity of blood vessels present; until the discoloration is removed, and it moves its color. Then treat with fine flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and bull's blood and goose blood, one part each; mix everything together, bind it in a cloth, and apply it to the area until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a cancer begins and you see it can be stopped, use the cautery in a circular motion all around the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And yet the wise claim that you should perform cauterization in the center of the tumor; however, I do not believe it to be beneficial, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen this happen before; moreover, a more appropriate approach is to cauterize around it using a circular cautery, as we have mentioned in many cauterization treatments.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	For the inflammation that cannot die down
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When anyone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays dying either due to the excesses it causes or from affecting the sickly person's condition when they are decrepit (that is, too old) with little blood, or because of tension; and you see it hastening death: then cauterize around many small ca
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 It will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire cautery cut apart, heat the caustic of which there is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the midst of that illness called "adubeleti" until it has felt its core, and make the caustic points such that the sickly feels them following in part as if to regulate the flow of putrefaction.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire wounds by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another disease that is called "corrosive," and it is nothing but a swelling of the limb because it eats away at the limbs just as fire consumes dry straws.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease on site that can endure the same cautery and fire together, then apply small and large cauldrons according to what is required at the place or where the illness is; after caulking all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, leaving nothing of it so that everything that has become rotten be extracted.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it rest for three days, and apply a poultice with oil until the scorch marks from fire are removed, and all decay is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying remedies of ointments generating heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days the wound does not heal well, it is good; and if not, resume the fire treatment on that which remains corrupted from being displaced.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this concoction is never treated with fever-reducing medicine before the fire treatment; however, the fire treatment is of greater help, and I have already described the treatment for fever medicine in my section: take what you need from it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	small stones that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often there is an occurrence where behind the wounds appears a disease we call "closed," and it is a large swelling that affects the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatment for this disease can be according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know fire cautery, and water cautery hot.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 It is a fire cautery that you heat as if it were a penny in the oven and made of good iron to protrude at all parts, with subtle edges; after heating it hot on the nail, turn your hand entirely around the nerve until it reaches the tip of the wart. Leave so for three days until it starts to show pus; then make a plaster of finely chopped honey and seal, leaving the plaster there all night, after which the wart will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the joint with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then if it is turned to the back, and this occurs many times on hands and feet, you must provide cauterization with hot water; here's how: take a vessel made of iron or lead, or a spoon of copper, place it over the wart and under the nail, that is for verrues. Put the vessel so that it covers completely around, then apply some hot water inside, hold your hand firmly, and press gently until the margin of the vessel reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep to the root; endure a bit of burning from the hot water for an hour. Leave as is, and it will detach all its roots completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do an after another, as long as you touch all that is on the body, then treat with ointments that ease pain.
li cure dou trembler	to d a lore:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shakes from coldness of nerves, or fever quartan or other, it is fitting that you make .iiij. cauteries or .iv. along the spine on the back; one cautery between each vertebrae; and one at a point, and another on the stomach with an olive oil cauterization; this will cease the shaking, and restore health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Never appear by themselves in advance of a body bathing or pus-filled sores, which come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is necessary when they appear that you make a cautery on each head of the sore: a subtle cautery made from pine wood where the tip is heated by fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow further outward but is broken off the excess from which it comes, and becomes healthy; but it must be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cauterized
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times it occurs that there is great bleeding from the artery that has been cauterized at the wound which comes to the edge, or in the incision of an abscess, or on a limb, and similar things; and it is very bad to stop the bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And anyway if this happens to anyone, hurry and place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very hard until the blood is calmed below your finger, and no more flows; then put a few olive oil caustics, both small and large, until they are all red-hot; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood flow ceases.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bursts out when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the fire cautery is extinguished, quickly take another of the cauterizations that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do one after the other until the blood is clotted; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; know that when the artery bleeds, it cannot be stopped alone if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have said: either by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which can stop blood.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the stopping of bleeding tightly with linens or putting burning things on it, or other similar things, if not much benefit is seen.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this happens to someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until blood is seen flowing over the wound and vein; and do not move it, but apply a cold cloth often enough that it is very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and stops running; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on wound healing.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicine, and poultices, causes, decoctions, and forms of cauters; and I placed that chapter up to the feet, and now I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that it is easier to find what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of the fire cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be exercised.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there occurs often the evacuation of blood upon opening a vein, and incision over an abscess, as well as treatments for wounds, extraction of arrows, incision into stones, and such things; where there is doubt and fear, resulting in many deaths.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways in which people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If they come from those who are so burdened by their illness that they easily perish due to the neglect of seeking relief from their disease, and its severity; and one must have fear for these cases.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these are those who give up their sense and say, "Wait, I am unwell"; and the illness is desperate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting that you agree to those who come to you with such manner, but rather put greater trust in your honor than in your desire and do not act foolishly but wisely on what you are certain of and have gained knowledge from; and use prognosis and indication in treating the sick so that health may be restored. And this will aid you to achieve good renown, glory, and memory for all time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and honesty, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by sections as the chapter of cauterizations is discussed, from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full head of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Maladies that often occur in children during birth and when the womb is excessively strained, and there are occasions where no solution can be found.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur in anyone other than children, and among those I have observed it has always been fatal; therefore, I believe my efforts are best invested in the specific treatments discussed earlier.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	e (Issie tiel que au ple;molard fle the mo viene and ce qu�turlemente l’s
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If moisture is greatly increased, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are openings at the corners of each part, and the vein bursts when pressed by your hand deep within, and it has not been reset: then one must make three incisions as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision, all excess moisture is removed.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After straining wound draperies and powders, put wine and oil on them, leaving in this way until the fifth day; then remove them, treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing it to heal evenly, and give dry meat without much moisture to the patient until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to observe where the head of the abscess lies and its water collection; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut at the place where the abscess head lies and its water collection is present, following as far as your ability allows; and be careful not to injure an artery; ensure that blood flows from it, so that the patient may die from the progression of blood loss and fluid evacuation.
de reume	For resuming
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and the illness is long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort of care is the cautery with which one cauterizes the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Thus, when you examine the wounds, it is necessary for the patient to turn his head back; then rub the area with an abrasive cloth until the arteries become visible, after which he strains both sides of his collar; next check if there's blood flow from either side near the ears and place them slightly apart. Then seal the holes on each side using two small parts of spatula-like material, ensaturated as much as necessary until the wound reaches bone level, with a wide opening at the top of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see them, place the sharp spatula under the artery and cauterize it above by cutting as with two parallel cuts.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is opened, a continuous stream of blood flows from it.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the artery does not open by touching, you must measure the space of three fingers, then tighten it and work up to the bone; what is required for blood flow is six drops, with a possibility of more or less depending on how much the patient can suffer, and the congestion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there is not any inflammation near the bone, and an abscess does not form, strain the wound, bind it up, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	To cleanse or wash away impurities.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an early form of gout appears, and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old headache with similar things occur, and it is treated by various methods of medical remedies but nothing helps, then we extract the arteries from the temples and perform cauterization, as we have discussed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that the patient grows hair on his temples, and hears an opening in the artery within the temple, as it opens well from its pulsation, and it is not fully closed like in some people who are too cold; if it closes, the patient should wear a bandage of some kind for a while, then rub the area with an abrasive cloth, and apply warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then lightly scrape the skin until you find the artery, then twist it at the edges and separate well with towels on each side; if the artery is delicate, and turns under the tip of a pin, then apply an ointment according to the amount of two drops.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not properly set, then he will never regain full health completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the wound with blood for 7 days until it is healed; and if the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and fresh bleeding occurs from the area between the threads at the same time; then remove any excess flesh between the two ties, and then if necessary cauterize up to the bone until the head is severed; this is the healing operation, provided that the patient does not have a fever and they are of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is aid in finishing the inflammations: for that's why it is more useful to inflammation.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And for the extraction of arteries: fill the cavity with old cotton and well-made bands; and when they are removed, treat it with dry medicines that induce heat, and bandages until it is sound; and if you find a cut in the artery as much as thou dost work there, then haste to cauterize the cavity by cautery, or employ thy hand's strength, so that the wound be sealed. And if thou hast no such thing, place on it until the wound is frozen, and moisten with cold water as long as the wound remains unsealed; and bind firmly as it should. The treatment of extracting arteries is more effective when cauterize the incision by sharp cautery cutting blade twice parts, but the sharpness be well to maintain longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When inflammations are too persistent, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a space as wide as one, and then when you start to tie them together with the thread, and keep the iron hot until it reaches the bone, cleanse the vein in two places; and be distanced apart by the two eyes because this cautery is not wholly effective at all; and here is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	mainme t
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 They called it the "ancient contusion cure," and you should do this for a patient with this condition by having them grow hair on their forehead. Then make three cuts or evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead; one cut reaches as far down as the end, while the others are two fingers wide above the eyebrows. Avoid cutting arteries that lie at the height of two fingers above the eyebrows. Extend your hand along the continuation of the jawbones and make each incision a length of three thumbs apart; prepare a piece of sponge and plenty of cloth for applying pressure to stop bleeding, then apply the healing ointment from this portion:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and from the incision that is towards the second incision; then scrape off all flesh that lies between the two incisions up to the suture of bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "cullet", which on one side is very sharp and on the other side is smooth, not cutting.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 Place the splint angled towards the chest near the heart, and position it softly against the bone, holding until reaching the middle of the split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Stitch all vessels that branch from the head to the eyelids as far as where the incision continues until it reaches near the heart; then make an incision at another spot and continue through the middle split until reaching the other side; then drain the blood equally, expressing the lump for the collected blood; place a tent made of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs to ensure no abscesses form. After three days, remove the ligature, apply generous amounts of boiled water compresses, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	For the eyesight of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come with acute catarrh as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakened sight, and burning of the papillae; and the hairs fall out, and at the forehead there is great pain, and feverish sweating; then from these incidents you know that those matters and such catarrhs do not come only from many veins, and the mucus cure where it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is to command the patient to return his head forward, then make a large incision near the forehead, and another quite wide one.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin the incision from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the incisions reach the bone; keep your hands away from the nerves around the temples when they move while eating; and once the bone is exposed, squeeze all the blood out onto a sponge, then surround the incision between its two lips with cotton wool, then stitches of linen; then wrap in cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; if it is fractured, you must rub the bone until a callus begins to form, then treat with cleaning agents that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts tincture of opium, and prepare it with fire; and administer to these wounds to promote healing throughout the entire area.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of plugging in the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of four things: grains, or beast, or stones from mine, or similar matter like iron; or seed, as if it were seeds, peas, beans; or substances flowing as water and easily passing through, such matters.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear or any other manner of thing that does not closely adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, place the ear against the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, then distill a drop of violet or sage oil and perform an extraction; it causes sneezing as a condition, they blow their noses when sneezing occurs, and place cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often healing comes from this treatment; but if it does not come forth, then delicate extractions with tweezeback are done, which is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it exits through the forceps, that is good; if not, make extraection with fine double-ended pincers; and if it does not exit thusly, create a small needle and insert its head or aperture into the ear firmly so nothing can enter with the needle; then healing occurs as we have said often. And if it does not come forth in this manner, take pitch like birds do, place some cotton inside, then use any sharp instrument suitable for the task, and press the pitch onto the stone or whatever is there; afterwards, extract normally.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come les arriere fai diz estropes en la ceu nule tene li leu isi que tu veine de lis eus li ointre les malaid, puis la oreille a ceste au sole il ynentrescuers.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a bone that has come through and swells, then perform an extraction; and if it cannot be removed, then apply a small cloth subtly according to this method:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and perform an incision in that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist from earwax, until you have performed many procedures; then extract with fine forceps and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction be smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Therefore, when it starts to come out of the ear, the patient should first use sneezing as a method, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And place your hand over the same ear where the discharge is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out so vigorously, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not, take many small pieces according to the length of your finger tips and light them on fire; then put them in a cup for the patient to smell, and insert one or two into their ear, while blowing gently from another side with fingers, using another piece over the pus-filled area. Continue doing this until all discharge is released forcefully, as we have discussed regarding stones: if you see an eyebrow hair, take a stick, put one end in the ear and burn the other while it's on fire; then make another set of sticks until all discharge has come out.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of animals, if they are small like fleas and such things, treat as we have said in division; but if they are large to be felt, arrange for extraction with tweezers; and it is easier to remove those that are in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from ears, when you treat them as we have said in division and deal with distillations, if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight; if any worms are present, use delicate tweezebrought, and if none appear, take the cure of bezoars that are found there.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And apply the more subtle part of the head to the ear according to the amount of pain suffered by the patient, then seal it completely around the wound; do this often until all veins are stopped.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not stop bleeding as I have described in the stone, stuff cotton around the wound; and if it does not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tried with incision of leeches, and you will find or treat them through distillations; and let your oils and medicines be distilled in the ear using this instrument, which is shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or copper made outside through small holes, and on top for distillation purposes; and to press within the distillation use an instrument well-made from copper, if you see a cloth wrap around the point promptly with cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines into the pan, so that it be in the ear; then put all the cotton inside the wad, and press with your warm hand until the oil is distilled or dripping from the ear; and the patient smells within, and the distillation is a small bowl over fire just as it is distilled into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good if it were.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of plugging in the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any hairs in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by plugging of a wound or a speck inside the ear, and these pluggings come at times fully into the ear, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes it does not happen .i. peacone lou pertus, and the sees well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When it comes from the front and cannot be seen, there is grave healing in various conditions, and in that which one sees, you must place the ear of the patient towards the sun; then look inside. If you see apparent inflammation, so the work has affected this entire area of tissue where the form is:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it is both above and below plainly, if it does not affect the ear; if the inflammaturism is of honey or body parts of the ear, take with subtle pincerings gently until all that has been affected is completely cured.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if there are obstructions in the ear, take a fine brush and dry it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the obstruction causing the patient to have ringing in their ears, gently pierce it, and ensure that you do not compress the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the size of the opening, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	On any day as long as the wound is swollen, take a tent and mix in powdered alum and rosewater, and if you see an inflamed ear, it's fitting to replace the tent with another one made of rosemary oil and beeswax until the inflammation subsides; then treat it as long as it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and wrap it in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remedies to address the blood loss that involve treatments such as distillations.
de la char des papieres	From paper burns
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	The disease comes from the nails when they are wet and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and forceps, and tie off a piece of their roots; then apply vitriol paste on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if the corrosion is not removed, you should cauterize with a fine cylindrical caustic and let it be moved after incision; many times they are repaired as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots become burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	From the grease
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times come from the eyes a thing that seems gravelly in its form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "grandine" (hail), with an accumulation of moisture above and below; the treatments are as follows: watch carefully if the grandine moves on one side or another, which is a light matter to know; then make it wide, then gently scrape each part, then take it with forceps, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot grasp it without piercing the paper slightly, nothing will harm the patient; and if the fissure is large, sew it with a stitch, and treat until it is healed; and if it is small, do not exert force, for the ointments will soon restore and prevent chagrin.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the inner ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper and use tweezeburners to grasp it, bind and press on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, nothing harms; and once the grandine is healed, wash with salt water, and cure the area causing pain until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	We'll translate this as follows: "And after it causes sores to cleanse the wounds." However, it seems incomplete or unclear due to a possible error in translation; please provide context for clarification. Please confirm with assistance. If necessary clarify whether retry if needed.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinus is a fat that appears in the sheets of paper, and it occurs mostly in children without exception, causing great discomfort to their eyes, leading them to have catarrh at mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears hasten to their eyes; thus, they lie on their faces upwards, sleeping with soaked eyelids that swell and appear obscured by exinus within the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press it back to its place with your hands, feeling the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of treatment is that the patient places their head in your hands; then take a linen cloth and make it into a circle according to the amount contained by the grease from each part, place it over them; press with both thumbs on either side so the greebly assembles within the circle. Then create a small cut in the middle of the moisture-filled area not larger than the vein wound made earlier; and work the skin until you reach the grease underneath; and from various positions, grease comes out through the cut as white fat pieces.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the entire piece of cloth between your thumbs and turn it to the right and left until dispersed; ensure you do not block in the cut, that you reach all the way through the vein down to the oil without cutting off too much.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the nerves do not open at the beginning of the tear, gently widen the tear until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with linen and water, and place on a bed, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such individuals crush seeds and put it upon to spoil that moisture which is present.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the treatment continues until it becomes healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes to a hot place, then the curing of plasters soothing until it becomes healthy.
des poilz des papieres	Of hair paper. (This phrase seems out of context and may not have a clear translation in this text.)
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs appear on paper in a way other than their nature and are aged, they harm the eyes and bring about methods of diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of papers, and albugine until it causes destruction; and there is treatment according to four ways: by cautery with fire together, or by medicinal ague as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suture or by cantharides, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper over with your left hand; if it turns well, it's good; if not, insert a needle into every thread on top; and be just below the margin of the paper or where hair grows near these hairs, and pull through one thread across all the paper, turning it towards the edge; then remove from undernee the part of the paper, away from the dislocated hairs, over the entire surface excepting between the large eyebrow to the small one; then extract a thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent made of cotton and linen cloth; also place above the paper an impression like that of a bellows, as in mistletoe, and it is necessary that the imprint be according to the quantity you see raised on all sides.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is a need for covering a large amount of the paper according to how softened the paper is; then apply plasters all over the II lines that you have marked, starting from the great margin up to the small one; and let one of the fissures be close to natural hair growth in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the II corners at eye-level, then scrape it entirely; then bring together the II edges with stitches using one needle and all I thread of fine wool, drain the blood, and trim excess threads over the II eyebrows with various sticky substances if you so choose to do so; otherwise, take no action, leave the stitching and threads until III days or IV; then treat the wound without any suturing materials or tightening agents, as the paper recovers on its own from the wound healing and joining together (as ancient texts say), but the stitches are movable (if so stated by the ancients); this is a procedure without fear. And here's another method: it involves shaping the paper into a form similar to the bellows of a marten, as we have previously described, with III needles removed according to the shape shown below.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then join what rises from small equal forces according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 If you cannot hold the tongs, and the object is not level, then take a needle with thread, and place it within its figure; then insert another thread near the large edge, and the second thread near the small, and join between your two threads evenly; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have sutured, as we have taught, then close the wound edges with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment; and there are times when hair on the paper is transformed: it requires that you use what we have instructed for incisions; but stitches in either place are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of this type is as follows: and that you transform the paper and fold it inward according to what I have said, and then make .ij. (two) holes by artifice, and two fine ligatures as long as the paper width and the spatula's breadth; and bind the fingers of the hands with .ij. (two) parts so that you hold the threads; then join one and the other subtly beneath what protrudes from the oil on the paper, and strain the two cords from the two pieces properly; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin which is stretched will die and heal and become supple, as long as it stretches by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed and the wound has become infected due to some force, then treat until it heals; and if the wound becomes swollen, and a scab forms, preventing hair growth; and you shall make according to this shape of two cords in accordance with this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	First of all, take a fine needle and thread some thin silk thread through it; then join the head and carefully align both delicately, ensuring the length of the threads is about an open hand's width; next arrange in order another short piece of thin silk thread quickly, and thread the heads with this new filament; then place the patient’s head on your platform so that the procedure can be clearly seen, as it is a delicate and minute operation; insert the needle through the entire length to the root of the hair adjacent, and cut the paper hastily while you slide it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the sheath, and thread that hair into the sheath if there are one or two or three or several; then remove your hand so that the threads appear aligned with the natural hair on the paper.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the sheath is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will tease the sheath apart from all the thread that you have arranged, until the sheath appears to be pulled through and can be seen by oil; then again you will tease the sheath and the filament, leaving two or three days or three, as long as the hair grows in its place and a tuft of hair forms; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural lock with it, raise it up until it is separated and then let it down.
de la porriture de l’oil	And to oil be sheath and lesse tee oil as by ate tu loin sheeth and uncoif the sheath are of hairs to heal so long, se loishe unlock telleth oint eul. Seize it is one lock and they shall you will not to te sheath unle: And be shewist de teoils three a leu ou c, then let la chouls the leslie with li leslde long lesse tu hairs soflesh lois anoint at ores. Let it is oil as the blood and se they are they shall come and of oil in to heels be sheath after if the lips them And teeth deo they hairl teeth d, butter the lick oils sheoul:them too long oules then two te la.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "aleacrati" or edema occurs in the body, it happens in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it occurs through sudden injury, surgery, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of treatment is to divide that suture, and detach its lips, and place flax thread within it; keep it until healed; and do not use anything in his care that dries or constricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but work on things softening like fenugreek; and rose of water or distilled with linseed grain cooked, and anointments dissolved in any oil, wrap a cloth around it, and treat that area.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal in its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are only for addressing this disease so that it does not return as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the chariot coming into the joint
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease known as 'azakri', is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident arises from wounds and fissures and cauterization and similar things; the method of treatment is to take an awl with double thread at both ends, insert the needle into the hole, ensuring that the threads come out through two holes in the shield; then stretch the shield fully over all the awl, and attach a cord with one spatula width.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the contour of the paper returns as it should, that's good; if not, take a rasp and put it in the split, then turn the paper, creating two splits or cracks within the paper; let both sides of the head be at the angles from which you cut, and make them so when joined together, the contour is like the letter "L" with no bar; then remove that part according to its thickness on either side, in a way that suits the paper, then bring the two separated parts closer, binding their edges with wool thread; then apply what we have mentioned about softening medicines and dressings until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a tear or stitching or cautery, it is necessary to make a clean incision below the hairline of the scalp, and according to what has been said before; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters prepare all possible means so that it may return to its natural figure; and also in cases where patients need treatment and remedies in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The binding of the scalp.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this binding occurs in such a manner that the scalp above is sealed with its white wax, and it cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must insert the tip of a razor below the scalp, and lift it up; and do so at the edges, as long as you scrape off what is near the subtil spatula, which should not be too coarse nor too sharp, so that the patient does not endure that the spatula scrapes too hard or softens the wax. And make your incision, carefully removing the adhesion, gently, allowing the scalp to return to its natural form; and it is well healed, and apply nothing in the oil mixed with water, but rather use clean water, then warm water; then place a linen tent between the scalp and the wax, and cover the scalp.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the foot
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It is said that the nail has two manners: one nervous and appearing as a hard swelling, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen moisture on bone; when touched with iron and cooked over embers, it cannot move. Both appearances begin near the great ridge, and grow slowly until they cover all vision and light movement of the foot.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of incision is that the patient places their head in pain, then you work with tweezamoins; remove the paper to your hand, then grip the nail at its base with small tweezers and pull upwards; then take a needle, and insert a single hair from horse, sheep, or ox, along with strong thread. Double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce it through the entire needle length, tie the nail to one side with string, and pull the other way, scrape away all fur from the edge of the nail that touches the skin to the end of its shaft and along the underside until you reach the apex, then cut off any remaining at the base of the ridge and the subtlety and fine strands, leaving the natural or ridge; such that through this incision does not produce usual tears in the body. And never is extended to the second toe only, but with thread, as we have said:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch and tear the flesh towel, and that the prunelle is not perforated; after making an incision, pour some boiled sealing wax into it, and with a collar made of litargire, leave it until the following day; then treat as needed for it to become healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle into it, and the hooks do not enter, this resemblance of a fingernail has often been treated with medicines; they arise as I described in the section, and if you see them covered, work on the patient's side with a light spatula according to this method:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And carefully lift the nail, and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a rash afterward, distill from your mouth into the litargire collar and red wool and sealing wax mixture, and cover it until the following day; then resume the other procedure of this same work, as long as it becomes entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in this regard as abscesses do, then first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, and resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh at the shin causes great harm in that region, suspend an oncinous bandage and apply it only partially, not all over; then let red-colored oil drip into the area from a mixture of lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the powder which forms under the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 For some people are born with red hair that covers the eyelid and is tucked under the papers and turned to the left; it appears as a round rose of alabaster; the operations so consist in having the patient raise his head, then work on his eyes, treating all areas deemed necessary by touching them firmly; first peeling back one area, then removing hair entirely up to its root with an iron razor until finished, being careful not to harm the skin during this process. Then make a small incision at the edge that we have mentioned in the nail and minor force extractions as described earlier; after the operation according to this method, it shows the shape afterwards; once the incision is complete and all hair removed, apply oil of seals or distilled coloured lily water mixed with similar corrosive medicines. If nothing remains attached, a new growth occurs, and if there is any doubt about heat at the site, let the area rest and treat the aposteme (inflamed healing wound) with soothing substances; then return to operations until healthy again, thus hair regrowth appears in this manner after treatment.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But also, you must carefully treat the wound from each oil of the body; and apply them as soon that you can be healed, and do not touch it again as much. And if accidental injuries are found within these members: de la oinz est celi; et ys, l’oeil en tout que tu poins ou toes d'autres leu les os eit, et li oil s'en esoie est a ceint li choses in the voiretee d'et esproveillos de oin. Et ses est, si la pains les l’oeil.
des voines des eulz	From the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red bruises are located under the skin, impairing vision and weakening the eye constantly.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore in the first one you examine with redness, which is found there and no other disease but the redness; then treat it thusly: instruct the patient to keep their head upright, then compress those veins along the entire line according to your wisdom, and be subtle with the pressure as follows.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two veins per degree as follows, one for each side according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you gently coax the veins out, and draw a small amount of blood after each time you see them removed; and ensure that you do not bleed the oil at the tip of the spatulae, and perform this procedure in the hour before noon when facing the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that only the veins are bled; and once you have done this, let it trickle into the jugular vein red and green to corrupt what is lodged there.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot extract all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave them uncovered until the pain is relieved and assured there are no burns, then resume as before until healed; this is their strength.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the jugular vein.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirs are called "arissati" furuncles: when you treat it with fire cautery and by using hot medicinal water as previously mentioned, if it is not healed, then create an opening above the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see decay and blackness, return to using all of the instrument as shown in its form; it will be called "aspre chief", consisting of hair from one of the tools described, sharpened like a file in this present shape:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the exposed bone and turn it with both hands, pressing your hand a bit until you know that the decay is removed; do this as needed, then restore the site with healing ointments.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the wound is swollen and hardened, and the body of the boil remains so for forty days, without healing or coming to an abscess, nothing else happens except that it is healthy; if not, there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to its opening near the nose as follows: uncover the bone a second time with iron and by medicinal acids, and when it is exposed, take out I inch according to this method, making the iron bar III-angled, and thinning down the stick up to where you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it near the bone by the cheek, and keep your hand away from the oil pot; then turn completely so that it penetrates the bone and the patient feels pain because of this if he holds his hand near his nose; and once you've restored its original position with dry medicines as I have shown you, when the matter rises and hardens in the bones, goes to the nostr groove; this is an easier thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limbs are fully extended and there is no sign of dislocation or narrowing, it is necessary to bind the patient; then apply a tourniquet, then attach bladders that do not cause pain when sucked out, then place oil with a band made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla; strain the oil, and wrap in cloths from below. The arrangement of the cloths should be such that you use soft enough cloths, doubling each one into four, then place one over another according to the amount needed by the limb; then strain it using a stiff bandage, and restart with bladders without causing pain when sucking; then remove the bladders and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligament becomes softened sufficiently, then carefully straighten it out; then remove the ligament after one day and night, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; otherwise, restart with the cloths, ligament, bandages, and bladders until healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The undoing of torn fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	d’est a la peus lesielles. The ploved le cue ce, et ego, puis que tu ; les est lien; Enlors avons tuit; lou maz desrize chert lite; qui lier; liqueset; Etre de l’t il; pour les autres vignes.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a significant appearance, puncture at the subtle spatulum that comes from the oil, allowing the white moist matter to descend and enter quickly between them; then extract until they are separated properly.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bow of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease known as «alcunnati» is not merely water assembled in the oil, appearing like flowing water but it's not; and its appearance during treatment is that you seat the patient on a specially prepared chair and straighten them, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and let it move as long as you see the bow coming above your fingers; then firmly insert it, and do not let it descend or become dislodged, and observe the patient's symptoms as usual; if it does not come down, know that it is water, and if the condition of the bow being assembled isn't as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Place the patient on your lap, then take the fine spatula and gently rub it over the horny membrane near the bend until it is loosened; once it has come loose, let a hot, sweet oil stream into it that has been mixed with honey or boiled fenugreek juice or water, then provide further treatment until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have seen similar cases in splitting injuries, and what needs to be done; when working according to the patient's health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands in the light of the sun, and oil them well and hold firmly; then place the paper from the oil on your left hand if the eyelids are turned outward or on your right hand if they are turned inward; then take in your right hand (if the eyelids are turned outward) an instrument called "almagda" or with your left hand (if they are turned inward); then place the tip of the instrument next to the cornea, by a slight incision in the edge of the oil near the outermost bend; and insert the almagda instrument gently, while twisting your hand until it pierces through the edge of the oil, feeling that almagta comes into contact with the hollow area; and ensure that the width of the almagda path is equal to the entire space from the corner to the end of the eyebrow; this is the cornea of the oil; you will see the bone on the clarity of the horny membrane, then place the instrument right up to where the liquid is, and press it out through another hole afterward.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the water flows now, see the patient before him and the instrument in its place.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting for a moment, and the water rises again in the second channel, place it with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not rise further, gently extract the algidum by turning your hand slightly; then return some fine saltwater into the oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert an old oil or moistened cloth soaked in rose oil and with a lot of egg yolk, tie it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those from our time, place over it a fine breadcrumbs mixture plentiful in egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the maggots cannot enter the flesh due to its hardness, for there are some men with very hard hairs, it is necessary to use an instrument called "alberit", of which here is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And thus pierce the conjunctiva only slightly, not too deeply, but make it quite fine, then apply algidum as we have said; and at the completion of the work provide for the patient an agreeable bed where he may lie on his back in a dark place; let him be free from all movements except light meals, and do not move his head or turn to either side, keeping it aligned according to its natural position until tomorrow; then remove it to that same dimly lit room, test his vision, show him some things, and reapply the ligature until after seven days; it is essential that this be done neither during the hour of cure nor immediately following incision but at a later time because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If abscesses arise, remove the oil before the seventh day and apply ointment for healing the abscess; when it is soothed, unbind the vision and place over its face an infuser to cover any day, and remain thus in that darkened house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And it issues from the place little by little, and transforms into its cases; be aware that no novices should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	A certain man came to us from Yrach and told us that in our region there are seen maggots causing water blisters, although I have never seen any here on our land nor read of them in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And they are the likenesses of maggot forms, for those who do not recognize them see only that. They are like worms properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads from this same subtlety are pointed, and the latter in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	what is done:
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Never arise or become variously swollen lumps, from which some appear like scorpions with many tails; and if there are such or they have been pierced by furious colors, and they turn pale in color of bone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In the case of those jugs that are swollen and not infected, it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; work on its nostrils, and pour the pungent juice into them, and treat the furrows; then bandage what you have held at the subtle point of a bone, until you know that the jug is completely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, try all delicate sutures; and if nothing stays in place, or swelling occurs, cut as it should be; and if malignant abscesses are present, hurry to cauterize them until they become sealed and the cartilages have ossified completely, then pour oil of larch or water with wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If he works and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is safe; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is a jug without bone above it, where nocturnal emissions do not occur: then you must tie a piece of linen thread slightly thickened with our hands, allowing space between each one; place the patient's head within the neck opening to its fullest extent and turn until odorous secretion emerges from the neck into the mouth; many times this is done in schools for children, and it is an easy task for those who are accustom([...] to do so.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do the procedure as long as you know that they have corrupted that vessel, then draw out the blood, extract the liquid, and moisten the thread with Egyptian unguent, and put it back to its place just like before; do this for III days or more, until the ointments erode all that is lodged in the vessel; and then place a seal of wax on it for some number of days until it heals, and if it needs dried medicines, use them; this is the method to purge the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the receptacle.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp like a vessel, and conduct as such; and if you see soot, make a closed vessel for purging the head, and place the head within to absorb substances; have one hand under the head while heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	what is done:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times arises in the head of the neck a disease called "telul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, it is necessary that you cut at the beginning, and the bone quite hard, then place on fire or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting until it becomes large, be watchful if it is hard, of fleeing color, of poor sense: do not touch with iron as it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from severe pain, not of fleeing color, and you see that it can be fully covered, then drain the patient and cut without fear, and treat dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut and sutured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Believe that when a substance of continuous production flows into one of these cartilaginous vessels, it is little effective and often in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then indeed when this occurs to anyone, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the edges together with a stitch, and treat until it heals; and if the edges are torn apart on both sides, ensure you scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then join the edges with a stitch again, apply powder to powder from dragon's blood, and incense mixture; and place over the powders a piece of lead oxide or other lead oxide material, and leave it until it shrinks by itself, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of suturing is to assemble the thread: with needles, as we have said in the abdominal wound treatment; or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	Treatment for abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When abscesses on the lips occur that are hard like grains of pepper, small and large; then it is necessary to cut the lips apart, make an incision under each nerve, take them with tweezebrought out in each part; afterwards soak the wound after applying vitriol ointment until it heals; and then apply a healing herb poultice, and treat the area of dried things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	From the root of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it arises on the gums with inflammation, which the ancients called 'albulus'; thus, you must support it with forceps, and cut to its root, allowing bleeding or blood flow; then apply vitriol paste or other drying powders thereon; if after incision, it often recurs, and is cauterized again, but does not return following the cautery; these are measures for treatment.
des sordens	of sorenesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	s;te la crovely;
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating a toothache, one must wait as long as possible before pulling it, for it should not be done hastily; for it is a matter of great importance up until there is no excuse to extract.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is strained from milking, ensure that you check for a sore gum.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the pain troubled the patient and he thought it was a toothache and treated the sore tooth; however, the pain did not leave because of this treatment until the evil strain is removed, as we have already tried on such cases before; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, it should be scraped around thoroughly with a firm stick to protect the gums from all sides; then move it slightly first with your fingers or delicate pliers until it is properly aligned, after which tighten the pliers securely; and let the head of the shoulder rest in its rightful place between thy joints.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if there is no swelling, take one of these ointments and apply a light amount inside from all sides, then move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 If the tooth is pierced and torn, it must be filled with cloth where the roots are; and if it is gently pulled out using forceps, do not break while extracting; and work very carefully around the gums to loosen the teeth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 Ensure you do not break it, and leave a part behind; it will return to the patient causing greater pain from the root's residual evilness.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 Be careful not to do as the ignorant barbers do, who by their haste and boldness break the cartilage every time without following what we have described; but cause great disease in the roots that remain or from breaking the cartilage, as often happens; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash its socket with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs therein, which often happens, fill it with vitriol paste; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tendons, to which you will attach the first bone, are at sharp points and large knobs, without doubling when pulling the teeth. And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	They should be of large bones such that they do not break during extraction, and made of iron well-forged, with teeth to hold them firmly in place.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains at the tearing, it is proper to place a piece of cotton soaked in butter on for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 As long as the tooth is softened, then apply the tweezers called 'algofri', wherein the head appears like a surgeon's probe; and within are made similarly to a file and it takes shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out with all these pincers, it is necessary to reveal the entire cartilage around the root and apply the instrument called 'althali', that is, forceps; which gives its shape.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	man’s.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has two heads, here is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools used for treating fractures of the bones, and this instrument which resembles large pliers, here is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be these instruments so they cannot break; and know that there are many tools for treating bone fractures; and other instruments too which are not counted among them; and the wise masters ingeniously use their instrument themselves, according to what their works and diseases show him, because there are some types of diseases where the ancients did not teach any tool due to the diversity of cases. And does not break on his limb or other bones which he searches for instruments that you have said, and helps in gestures, here is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well held to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can keep and remove; then restore its original position with suitable medicines for this purpose, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, use all of this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to natural form and its shape is unattractive, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the nerve remains after the tooth, and it's not on the correct side, and cannot be soaked or filed down; then scrape it. And if it is sharp with the toaster, use this instrument whose form is shown here, resembling a small beak, made of iron finely sharpened at one end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And hold the file lightly and carefully for a long time due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move other teeth; if it appears that one can be filed down, use this part of the file as shown by its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is also like the sharpening of a gimlet; and as with a gimlet's teeth that one sharpens little by little day after day until it cuts; then in the end there will be no resistance at all, and if its point is too sharp and it nips the tongue, it must be smoothed down so it becomes even, so that it neither bites the tongue nor corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the tooth needs extraction either by tapping or dropping, and the patient cannot press upon what it chews without salivating, having treated them with medicines that constrict, but there is no effect; if they need restraint, then use a thread of gold for it, as silver threads become greenish and rusty, while gold does not change at all. The length of the thread should be neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth; and when you straighten the teeth, take the wire and place double twists around the II healthy teeth, then insert the heads between the teeth if there are I or more, until you fit snugly on the healthy tooth of the other side. Then resume covering up to where you started removing, and gently but skillfully pull back your hand until it moves no longer; keep the wire attached to the root so that it cannot slip out again.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then use pliers to grip the bone ends, and join them together, ensuring they do not touch the tongue; then let it stay as tightly as possible, and if it dislocates again, rejoin with another filament; if stable, it will serve thus for its entire lifetime, and this is the shape of the teeth and the appearance shortly after healing:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, it is reset in its place again and again as we have said; only those who are wise and patient should do this, never forming the shape of a wax seal impression of bone, placing it back where the deficiency lies, holding it firmly as we have said, remaining long-term.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	And for the tie on the tongue's ligament.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Never is this ligature made from under the tongue or naturally, such as that; nor by accident of a quickly sewn wound; and the procedures are those in which you work on the mouth of the sick person, keeping his head steady, and lifting the tongue; then cut the nerve ligament wide enough so the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, it's a result of the wound, so twist off the ligament piece by piece; and ensure that the incision isn't too deep, near to the artery below; and after you have done this, lift the tongue slightly with warm rose water or cold water, then place a linen tent underneath the tongue; and each night, dye the patient so that they cannot close their eyes.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 When blood flows from the wound, if vinegar is applied to it, then use the slow-burning cauterizing iron which is good for this; and treat with another remedy until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it is of black or hard color and the patient does not feel it, do not touch as it is cancer; if it is leaning towards a bladder, and there is moisture present, pour onion juice upon it, which causes an odor, and free it from all sides; and if you manage to overcome it with your treatment, apply mercury powder until it becomes inactive, then return to the treatment as long as you need to address everything; then raise the lump easily and completely, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	For throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Never comes a swelling in the throat called "godath", and it is properly known as two almonds; when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, be careful: if they are abscesses hard of slight substance and flesh-colored, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for the bleeding; but leave it until it heals, then you shall cut it off, or it will break by itself; and if it is pale in color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument to cover, but first make sure that the abscess is resting and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be upright, and perform work on the mouth with your hands, and press the throat with a serpent between his fingers; and it should be shaped like silver or fine iron as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with this instrument and see the abscess? Take a needle and insert it into the head, then pull upward more than you can; and apply any dressings needed. Then cap the instrument on top of which is a form that seems like force; the handle is bent, one end to another, very sharp, made of iron or silver wire:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, use the clamps which also form a shape.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And take scissors on one side and the other; when you have clamped one of the heads, clamp the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient's mouth with warm water, saltwater, and honey solution if any blood flows, then rinse again with either boiled quince rinds or fennel fronds, until it is clean; and cure until healed. If no other abscesses form in the throat besides these two heads, clamp them just as you did the first ones.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I healed a woman with an abscess inside her throat, which was of minor concern; and I had thoroughly closed the entire throat so that she could not breathe through the conduit being blocked, and couldn't eat or drink, and would have died if it persisted for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swoln that I had to make an incision with a needle through its two narrow openings.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 So I immediately did it and inserted one needle in the throat, then the vein bled greatly, then I reinserted into another nostril but could not go far, and blocked the mouth and pressed on the tongue; afterwards I inserted the needle into these abscesses, and entered part of one, only a small amount of blood came out. Thus the pathways in the woman's throat were cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, without stopping treatment of that abscess for long periods; the abscess would grow again, and fill up the space I had emptied, until it became very large. Then I tricked it and cauterized inside her throat: thus it stayed without growing; and I left those parts, and only God knew about her afterwards.
de l’uve	The term "de l'uve" is an Old French word for the eye or a grape (depending on context). In medical terms, if we are discussing treatment related to eyes, "the eye of someone suffering from inflammaturms" would be a reasonable translation. However, without additional context, it's difficult to provide a precise English equivalent.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When they resume at the eye, and it is escaped and extended, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is out of large and round, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess head subsides and becomes subtle, then you should drain it; and if it is round but not long, and it is bloody or of flesh color or black, then you must incise around it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it as I have described in regard to its shape and length, seat the patient facing the sun and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert a needle into the eye, pass it through, and drain at 2/3 of the depth that I said in the incision of the 2 almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess beyond natural limits; for if you cover too much, it will be harmful to the voice and speech; and after incision, follow what we have said in the incision of two almonds, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears being covered, then you must apply an instrument for reassurance during the procedure.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of the cautery is to have acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have mentioned for the fire cautery, moistening with fresh warm water so that it's not too thick or too thin; and apply the pressure of this instrument, which has the following form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it has a head or wound where you place the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument over all of the medicine; let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and muscle secretions flow from the mouth into the medicine without going to the throat and stomach; then hold your hand over all of the medicine and press it onto the wound for a quarter hour, until you see dizziness from the medicine subside; and if you notice, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument into the cotton in the area above, until the cotton adheres to the wound; and do this frequently until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry and fall off after 2 or 3 days. And if you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, do so again, and after the cautery, extract around the wound using cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and rinse with gargles until healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective with incision than with cautery; if it is treated by smoking according to this method, take aniseed and wormwood and rue and chamomile and verbena and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in a jug, let it steep, and boil; then the jug should be well sealed with strong clay, and within the jug there should be an instrument hanging according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 Silver or copper, whichever head is placed in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is sufficiently numbed; then often begin again, until the eye dries out, and ensure that at first you do not apply heat during the onset of a hot abscess, for many things may happen; and do not solely rely on it when reducing the swelling from a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a canal and insert in the head of an ewe's horn so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the horn of an ewe does not allow vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it affects the throat at the bone or spine of a fish, or any other thing; thus, you must examine what is visible and press the tongue toward the sun with all instruments so that you can see the movement; and if nothing opens up in the throat, then you should make the patient vomit until the flesh cooks in the stomnagogue. By chance, if it ejects through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or some crust of dry bread; and with the sponge, attach a thread, then transfer it (the foreign object); and when it returns to its original place, you must examine it. If it doesn't come out from what we have described, then take an appropriate instrument:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	The inflammation is raised to the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head upward; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, as it may swell or push in the bone within. Move the instrument until the patient puts it there, because this will make the inflammebody move or where the thing is stuck; if they swallow downwards, then you must examine everything completely, as long as it has been moved.
de la sansue de la gorge	Please exclaim: The throat without any obstruction and no longer remains in the mouth of a spitting. If there are still remain in the mouth; or if they do not remove all the throat does not come out, so it is taken out as follows: And let be removed from the mouth.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Never is there medicine without suction, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look into the throat of the patient under sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see suction, treat it all around with tiny pincers or delicate tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if it is not suitable, then take a heated iron rod and insert it into the patient's throat, then apply frequent blasts of hot bellows to the iron rod as often as possible.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if you believe that the patient is suffering from water poisoning every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take full leather of cold water and work on the mouth and let it taste as if swallowing, and moves often to its hand; and when the patient feels the water, it flows out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not flow as we have said, then perfume the patient with rosemary, using the instrument I mentioned in uve smoke treatment; do this many times, for it will smell less pungent.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot where there are carbon residues, and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, allowing the head of the instrument to be placed; then add your fumigant, and have the patient place the base of the container in their mouth, sealing the mouth so the smoke does not escape but goes up to the nostrils; now the nostr grooves, and if it does not flow, start the fumigation again many times; make the patient endure thirst and eat unsavory things, and do not drink water; and soon enough they will need to vomit by this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	the swelling.
li chapistres des apostemes	The treaters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many types of abscesses, as remembered from this book in one way or another, and they vary between perforation and cutting; there are two ways to do it, one being the same method but due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is for buboes located within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 because abscesses on the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses in the groin area are different from those that occur in joints, each requiring its own judgment in treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if to treat abscesses one should not cut until the swelling is fully healed according to its progression; and for such that must be cut when ripe, and do not heal as per their progression, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When an abscess comes near the joints and is left to rot, sometimes causing impairment of the ligament and nerve in the joint, which causes contractures in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 If the abscess is near the main limb and you delay perforation until it dies, it will harm the main limb; if it's near the root, pierce it so that it dries out completely; and only then should you pierce an absess once digestion is complete, especially near the root, to ensure it does not spread outward and becomes a fistula, which cannot heal over time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforating an abscess when it has ripened according to its completion; and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and slight debilitation and sharpening at the head of the abscess, and other signs. It must be that you let the perforation sit or as high up from the abscess as it moved; and it should be a long perforation in accordance with the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, or any other similar areas without swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that bulge, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in its natural place, it should be left to drain until the process of complete digestion is finished, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it from above, the poison of its contents may spread throughout the body and be filled with much filth; and sometimes the lips harden and the deeper parts become so.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And for any abscess that is pierced according to the size of the body, as its limbs require it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary to pierce small abscesses with small punctures and large abscesse with large ones, as well as multiple openings depending on the size of the abscess; if such an abscess requires closing its opening or sealing it when it becomes hard like cloth and dead, then do so as you would for a blister: and if there are those that are torn in three angles, or like the bellows of fir, similar to arm-abscesses; and if there are such where one makes a round incision, along with other punctures and closures.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 For those who have a superficial boil like an abscess, you must simply pierce it easily; and if the abscess is large and has great swelling, do not drain all of its contents at once, but drain part of it; then stop draining for a day, then no longer drain anything directly; repeat this process gradually larger each time until completely emptied; especially if patients are weak in strength or pregnant women, young children, or elderly men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the boil will occasionally spurt when draining occurs, which may cause harm to the patient, and you should be cautious.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Remove this dressing carefully with great caution, and when you have noticed your abscess, open the wound, and examine if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it's a neat size, prepare tents from linen or old cotton; and if it's large abscesses, and there are many threads, then one tent must be placed in each so they meet together; and if you have cut into the sore part of the skin, and wrapped it around, then fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, until three days have passed; then bandage, and treat with ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 If bleeding occurs from the wound, treat it with cold water and ease, and wrap the area dampened many times over.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If bleeding persists, treat it properly and heal the wound, and apply the powders mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the area of the puncture or abscess is very sensitive, wrap it with damp tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it's summer, and the area is fleshy, cover it with moistened cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil until day three as we have said, then release the puncture or abscess and drain and treat it appropriaderently until healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	It is essential to know in the treatment of arrow wounds: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating arrow wounds, and this chapter explains it.
des soros	About arrows
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When little abscesses appear on the head, there are methods that resemble pouches like those of a tailor's needle, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are those that are greasy and similar to hairs due to moisture; and there are others that are hard and piercing like thorns at the tailor, with no doubt if an arrow causes harm.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the workings of circumcision are that you must try with all instruments called "intermitting," from which the shape comes afterward and what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, they fall due to excess length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it, because it returns if left alone; then soak a cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, use water and salt, and apply to the wound until the next day; this will cauterize those remaining from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And so begin the cotton again as before, on the second day and at intervals, as long as you are sure it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with an ointment appropriate until healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess is large, apply it with this grease according to these long strips; and make incisions around it, scrape off all skin, and provide all treatment necessary for treating where it lies; and if the arrowhead points contrary, do as I have instructed you previously.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat an abscess that is pus-filled, and with the tailor's knife and curette as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 The swelling on the abscessed pus hole is easier to treat, as there is little blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if in any of these abscesses or wounds there is no moisture present, and among the abscesses I encountered are those from an elderly woman; I found the abscess similar to a long, sharp, bleeding stone, which could not be broken; and had one struck it, they would have made a wound as if from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or wounds that come from children's heads and the roots of ears, open them as soon as possible if they are located at the most accessible place, to allow pus to escape; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	;t:
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and from under the ears, and in the armpits, and never elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous, and interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And these tumors are properly hardened at their base, just as we have said for boils and abscesses in the head; and there are many kinds of such tumors.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain pus, and others that have malignant properties which do not wish to submit to health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In that case where you see good condition upon touching it, and is similar to the color of the body, not hard on either side and not spongy like the veins in the neck or arteries or ducts, and not deep; then one should cut above, scrape off each part, stretch out the two edges near the glands as you need (as we have said for abscesses of the head); and pull slowly but surely that you do not damage the nerve or vein, nor is there any spatulous or cutting tool that slips from your hand, nor sees too far ahead, so that you don't cut anything unnecessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then put vitriol paste on the wound, or any powders that remain blood, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and becomes softened the wound, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood is stopped, return to your work until it is completed; then use your knife if there are any small scrofulous swellings left, cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofulous swelling, it does not suit to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang freely without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and stitch them now, so that there is no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And if it is necessary to open at its root and drain the pus, and stitch as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have excess, open where the pus has accumulated; and puncture it as previously mentioned, depending on, then apply dressings with ointments and similar things if there is decomposition of what remains from decay; and when the wound is thoroughly cleansed, administer a poultice for healing until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	Of quinsace
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and talked about the incision of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have quinsace, it is necessary that the incision of the throat, called "epiglote," be made; and this cannot be helped with it, because all the veins and the main part of the illness are high in those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two amygdales.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the throat, it must be covered with an epiglottis to avoid impending loss from strangling.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 It is then necessary that when we wish to split the epiglottis, we do so either above three circles or four from one small cut across, between two circles or by the quantity of the cut on the sides; and those teeth are suitable for cutting the epiglottis without any resistance, and the scissors remain long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is apprehensive, he should extend the cowhide of the throat to the entire edge, then split open the flesh as far as it reaches to the bone; and draw out any blood vessels, if you see anything, and then seal the slit, as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the bleeding from the incision at the edge of the bone that bursts through where it is broken, and due to loss of voice; and leave the open wound covered for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for doubting strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound so that the edge is completely smooth and free from jaggedness; then apply medicines which promote warmth until it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	And if one does this before the throat is completely blocked, and the patient appears near death, with difficulty breathing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then you shall cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason are instructed to leave the open wound until the illness is gone, which takes 3 or 4 days. Then you shall sew up the wound and treat it, until it has healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I witnessed a maiden who took a knife and stuck it in her throat, injuring part of the larynx; and I hurried to be called for help, and found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and found blood coming from it; and indeed that she had not cut veins or arteries but only her throat, and life was flowing out through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastened to stitch the wound and treat it until it was healed; and nothing happened to the maiden except that she became hoarse in voice, but later returned to her normal state; for this reason I say there is no fear when treating the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	Of the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses in the color of jasper, and occur mostly in women; and there are two ways: natural and accidental; or naturally, it has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental cases are in two ways: one is like grease on us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from us through arteries; there is fear, and you should not operate unless it's a small case, and try and check everything thoroughly: if you find it as you do with grease, and does not lead to any vein, then cover it like we cap hair, and treat it all around its head, if there are points; examine well and treat it as needed until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 There are many methods among us, of which I will tell all the resemblances; and now it must be said what the differences are between ours and theirs.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an abscess is swelling and fever, as long as the boiling continues, and inflammableness is completed; then the fever and swelling subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With ours, there is neither warmth nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and follows the color of the body, beginning like glass and growing; and they are two appearances, grains or moisture, with colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the patient, first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermitting", according to its form or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the method of inquiring into boils among ours is to grasp or find more moisture there where you detect in the boil and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that it has perceived the head, then remove the intruder, being careful so as not to slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs in a vein, so it has color, then do as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the incision there is no moisture, believe that it is fatty, then dress it accordingly with cross-shaped applications, and take tweezers to lightly scrape off each part while guarding the cloth where it lies so you can treat it healthily without leaving anything behind. And if you cannot make it healthy as a whole, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If there is anything left behind, it returns many times; and if some remains a little while without causing pain, then apply the wound with certain corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and put on warm soothing substances for other treatments until healed; and if they are large, cut into two pieces of the wound and cure it as one would cure a charred wood.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the joints are swollen and in opposition or something else, hasten to apply a poultice of vitriol broth, and leave it on for 2 or 3 days until the wound is healed, then let the sanguineous exudation rest; afterwards return to its place as it previously was.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Here are the forms of entangled threads, and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three sizes which are called "albaret", one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to search for abscesses of fistulae; and they are like the needles used in witchcraft, made of citrus wood or iron or silver, and those moved by wind resemble those yellow ones, and more effective for searching black leeches of febris; and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of tumors are mostly similar to what you see here: large, medium, and small; if there are tumors that have two types of abscesses in three ways alike; and if there are tumors with three kinds of abscesse, and they come in three ways as well; and if there are tumors with two kinds of abscesses only, and they also come in three ways; and all these must be dealt with accordingly.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these which are cut are sharp, and among them some that do not solely cut but also scrape the skin so as to leave the vein and nerve intact; and among those inserted back into place are lashes in bunches such that the patient does not feel them at the onset of abscesses. There are three kinds: large, small, and medium, which you observe; they are only used where well-nourished, like legs, arms, nipples, ankles, and similar places; and never is a smaller instrument made like scraping lashes as per this method to stop bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed at no time back into its original position where the veins are tied off, and in the arteries, and never returned according to this grand form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 At no time do men's nipples become inflamed when they start to be corrupted until they resemble female nipplete; and remain ugly and swoln, and if one wishes to treat them according to this form of the line .b. up to point .g..
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape the fatty tissue and apply medicinal charms to dress the wound, then sew the two edges of the wound together, curing it until it is healed; if the flesh hangs downwards, treat it gently due to its size as in women, where they pinch above with two strips, by means of slight tears made therein; one strip should hold onto the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this method along this line from b. up to g.; then scrape the leather between the two edges and remove the fat, applying what we have described for stitching and powders, as well as any necessary items in its cure until it is healed; if it is not healed or the incision has not been properly made due to the patient's unwillingness to rest or blood loss, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it reabsorbs the remaining tissue and fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses of arms and legs
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from the limbs are types of hard scrofula or lumps containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those then containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	do the same;
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like hard growths of scrofula, make it as we have said in splitting scrofulous lesions, and if the wound opens up again, treat with fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Incising into the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is cut open, and the skin over it swells up, this often results in multiple abscesses, and similarly occurs with veins that become inflamed; when one identifies it as being for the artery, these abscesses are very large; and when you feel it on your fingers, it feels extremely painful; and if it is regarding a vein, there appears to be much discharge; and it is folly to cut open this abscess, especially when it is located under joints, at elbows or knees, and in various other places, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary to remove the iron cure, and in those who are chief it must be removed as well, and in those where an artery has burst above the long skin; then work on the hips with scissors, and gently release the artery from its bands, until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath, and pierce the artery up to the other side, and draw the artery through a double thread in two turns as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries that are on the temples; then fix the leather which is between the two threads of an instrument as long as blood does not flow from it, and release the abscess; then prepare the cure to bow so that the ligature slips off; then apply ointment until it heals properly; and if the abscess is through the vein's edge, you should grasp with your hand what you can of the abscess along all the skin, then insert a neednidote underneath the area you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and have a double thread so that you pull from the other side; then tie off the abscess as I told you, or bind one part with two heads of the double thread; and if you doubt whether the threads are strong enough, insert another needle all through both threads at the incision made by the first needle, and draw out four threads; then cover the abscess until any extra tissue is gone, then cover the excess flesh and leave what is tied off; then apply cloth soaked in wine vinegar or oil, and use bandages and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of the veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	le lesse they t qu's (tard Marm; The following lines the same heuze: [A-J  J. I.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This occurs more often with shoulder dislocations and joints in all areas where there are joints, causing the most severe boils, and their color appears like the body's natural color, and they have various painful conditions; and when they are forcibebly straightened, they feel intense pain, not throughout the entire body but from under the face; they move well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, upward nor downward, and those who are dislocated should not be bound by iron: sometimes there may be contractions; and those with injuries to the head or forehead cause swelling at the temples.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the boils are small, if you have pincers, cover them at their root; and if they're large, tie off with a ligature, skin it, then bone it, stitch up the wound along the seam, and care for it until healed.
des grosses boces pendans	From large hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Never occurs elsewhere than in the stomachs and nowhere else; it is a disease called 'fungus' by its appearance of mold, with fine roots and thick branches; there are both small and very large ones; I have seen individuals who had two or three stomachs that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference, white in color, with tiny roots, split open, and filled with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces and the other 6 pounds; in making the incision for inspection, you should check if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and damp with fine roots; apply a spatulary bandage broadly, and have the fire cautery present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 On many occasions there are great blood losses from cutting too deeply, and if the vein is not tied off quickly, then you should apply a hot iron; and if you see the patient hopeful yet fearful of the incision with the steel, take a well-made thread and tie it as we have mentioned, leaving two days; and then tighten it, continuously tightening the plank thread until the vessel is clamped off, causing it little trouble through this method; and if the roots are thick, beware of fearing for his stomach, but you should well cauterize a portion, preventing it from bleeding again; then treat the wound, ensuring that you do not cauterize the vessel that is of sickly color and poor sensation, and resembling milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an infection from syphilis, and I will come to the treatment of this sore hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth is too tight
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of gangrene comes from wound or abdominal fistula and is located in any part of the body as it occurs in other regions, or blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or inflammation; and if it's due to fistula and discharge of pus, its color resembles that of the body, and is a slight thing without pain, open at various sites.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	the c.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's due to moisture, it is slight and open when you press it with your hand, do not restrain; and if it's from blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and protrude according to a certain amount; and if it's from inflammation, it is sensitive to touch, and its appearance should be checked to see if it resembles arterial or venous blood, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If necessary, let the healing process take place.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have mentioned in the chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to inflammation of the intestine or bowel, you must instruct the patient to dye his alley and extend it straight, then bind all around with a bandage; place him on your lap between your hands, then work along the area that you have marked out with all its fullness; extend half of the abscess upwards over the entire great thorn. Then tie the abscess tightly with strong thread or a cord made from sturdy silk; make sure they are well bound together. Work on the extended part of the abscess, and apply your ointment there, then inspect the intestine; if you find it trapped at the bindings, release them, and insert the intabulum into the intestine; and if you find a bulge (hernia), remove the excess tissue; and if the artery is acting contrary or the vein, go gently around with your fingers, then return to your treatment area and take out two hairs, and put in two thread ends, and insert the two hairs where you made a cross when making the incision; then stretch the abscess by four places on either side of the hairs, and if you see it, remove the hairs, and let the place remain until it heals, and expel any dead tissue; or cut off any slimy and mucus-like material when you find it, then treat according to what is appropriate, and cleanse the abscess as we have said; and extract any blood or moisture that you see, then treat the area accordingly, and close up the wound.
dou chancre	In regards to ulcers.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	by this. That the following thesus and cur so far.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when in place or can be removed as we have said, are to purge the patient once of black bile; then make a bandage if there is obvious overfilling, then prepare the patient with clean area for the operation; then pour on your herbs or cream, and remove hair from all parts, and any osteophytes from all parts without leaving anything behind; allow blood to flow freely, pressing firmly on the site with hand or an object, and if bleeding occurs in a direction opposite to the incision of artery or vein, cauterize until it stops; then attend to further treatment until healed.
de ydropisie	Dropsy (edema)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have described in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and those that are treated with iron; only these two are highlighted. And one should not touch them with iron for these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and hyposarcoma, as they are deadly things; therefore, when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "eclites" by medicines, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another disease than dropsy, such as liver issues and similar matters; do not touch with iron, as there is doubt. And if you see a patient with strong vitality, and he only has dropsy without other diseases, and he is neither too young nor too old, then work thus: lift the patient straight in your hands, and let the assistants press the belly by pushing water to the lowest part of the backside, then take the spatula bony according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And use a sharp instrument with two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And use a sharp instrument with a point, and at all times ensure that it is not so thin as to penetrate into the intestine when inserted; also make sure it does not bleed. Then examine if dropsy has set in towards the intestines: if necessary, incise directly above the buttocks III on the right side; and if dropsn is due to liver disease, then make an incision on the left side of the buttock III; and if it is a tumor, do so on the right. It should not be done in such a way that excess fluids drain into weakened areas for the patient. Next, pierce all the skin with the instrument, apply pressure, and elevate your hand over the entire interspace between the skin and fascia just as while shaving around or of a similar quantity to an eyelash; then penetrate the fascia until it reaches the level eight, which is where fluid accumulates, then extract this matter, and insert this instrument with its particular shape.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is like a silver needle fine and light, located below the small hole; with one costal rib on one side, three holes; two on the other side, and one elsewhere. The head is cut so as to resemble a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers make when cutting the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top is the aorta; when venous blood arrives at the wound, it should be drawn immediately through the instrument; then you empty either half or one third of it, because if you empty more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the expulsion of his spirit from the weapon, which causes him to become pale, or he comes close to death. However, you draw according to the quantity needed based on the virtues of the patient and how their conditions indicate, as well as their hair; then move the instrument and grasp the blood, now held by a clamp placed at the vessel located above the liver, about which I have spoken, that you puncture in this manner. Then resume the instrument the following day if you see the patient suffering again, and draw some more of the blood; do so every day but be careful not to draw too much until it stops flowing, then give a little bit only.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 If you doubt the patient and leave him much water, if you treat with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in sunlight, and dye with drink; then treat with dry medicines until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the fluid, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the blockage of the rod (or penis)
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Never is a child born who does not have any foreskin on the penis, or if the foreskin is small, or it's not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it must be so soon that he has been pierced on all his veins very finely according to this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then put on the subtle bandage underneath, and bind it tightly so that for three days or four, when he needs to make urine, open the bladder, and let him pass urine, then reset; and if by chance there is no need, because the urine that comes out does not keep it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If the one who wears the bandage has dribbles, then it is the treatment of the bladder with a cloth as we have said, which will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the bandage in place are impotent because none are born with the bladder at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis up; and they cannot impregnate because the material cannot reach the testicles, which is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the rod and the cup as straight as a pen's length so that the urine may flow easily, as it should; and guard against blood seepage which often occurs, and if it happens, use the ligature to stop bleeding and treat the wound until healed.
des pustules de la verge	And of pus-filled sores on the rod.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the rod, and have a hideous appearance; there are both malignant and benign ones; it is necessary that you pick them with a very fine needle, bandage and clean thoroughly, then place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diaphanous balm until healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and oozing, it is necessary that you treat it with fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cut it off, and if the ulcer is partly within the bone and partly further out, then remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it has healed, treat the part that was outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat it all together, ensure the bone of the wound is not perforated, and darkness and decay come to its place causing gangrene; then close up all that is blackened and corrupted with an ointment made from the peel of pomegranates and dates, then heal it with other treatments until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 If there is a flow of blood, then arrange the lunar cautery according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery serves two purposes together: that is, for the flow of blood and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to stuff or direct the penis with a reed pipe, and let the patient urinate through it; and when hairs are sparse at the top of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised, which occurs for wounds or abscesses, then indeed you must scrape with an instrument called chevere until the ligaments are released and freed from all sides. And if this is a grievous matter to discuss herein, it is necessary that you scrape with spatumile (a type of cauterizing iron) slightly at the head of the penis and hairs; then carefully separate between them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water upon it, ensuring it does not become completely bald.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a continuous separation like other wounds; however, if we perform this work of our own will and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the easiest to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, as they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	This is the translation of the text line by line:
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundificación que es dou dal n'est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundificación de l'ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, y corront l'uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu'il n’ont mestier de mundificación y je l’ai veut.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	De la mundificación que es feita con fuerzas al todo el lien del fio he trovado la bondad del experimento, porque las fuerzas cortan igualmente arriba y abajo.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, make it equal in all ways; but the child must be awake among the skin; and let the manner of the first procedure be such that you cause the child to think if they understand, that you are only twisting the thread around its length alone, then allow it to breathe in all manners possible; then keep it between your hands straight, and reconnect the forces between your hands or below your feet so the child does not see them, nor any of the strands; then put your hand on the rod and blow or sigh, and draw it up until the head of the rod is out; then cleanse well of the filth that has accumulated there; then tie the knot with a double thread, then secure it below one hole to another loop; and hold as close as possible at the pocket and index finger, and bridge between the two loops, then lift the root gently and move the head of the rod; then let blood drip slowly because this is for girls; and put powder on and around the powder with a gluey cloth from half an egg cooked improperly with pink water, blended with good quality oil rose, and leave it until tomorrow, and treat with other remedies until healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of strength for purification is as follows: both heads should be held and sharp, and the head should be as large as the hand equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in purification occurs when the core within escapes during incision; therefore, it is necessary for you to extend it with your fingernail, similarly causing an abrasion on the skin, and then cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they persist for three days, and what is under the rod is swollen, leave it until the abrasion has calmed down, and lightly scrape off; then cut as you can move, but beware of the part of the rod, this will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus treat the sudden wound of powder as we have said about treating powders, and if it is covered over too much, and it goes beyond, then no harm will result; treat accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	For the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, frozen blood, or arrowhead, or similar things as we have mentioned in the section; and if urine is retained and you see that it's because of an obstruction from a stone located at the base or neck of the bladwick, then the patient should be laid on their back with legs elevated; they should lay flat on their back, stretching their belly upwards towards their spine, and restrain themselves as much as possible. Then you must compress the bladder's neck to expel the stone causing urine retention; and if it doesn't come out, like we have said, and the patient experiences great pain, then you should provide relief with extraction using a tool called 'catheter', which is: made of finely worked silver wire, as thin as bird feathers, and about half a palm long.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The method for discharging urine is to take a double thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton at one end, then insert the other end into the catheter; trim any excess wool and secure it up to the top of the catheter, then anoint the caster with oil or butter and almond oil, and make the patient sit on a stool, applying oil soaked in olive oil and water to their bladder and penis, then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches near the base of the penis, then pass the tube over to the scrotum; then fill the caster with urine until the bladge is full.
des maladies de la vessie	For diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalds or blood enters the bladder, where there is an assemblage of pus, and you see it needs to be drained with waters and medicines, do so using all instruments called "clepsydra", which is how it's done.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leftover hairs by which the medicinal paste remains firmly attached to the penis without slipping off with addition, so that we can extract moisture, and insert when necessary; and when you see your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the catheter into the moisture, and pull on the string which is inside; by pulling the string at the catheter, you will extract the moisture with a pump, then firmly replace the catheter plug; this way the moisture enters and comes to the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it; and this is the subtle form of enema by which we cleanse the bladder: thus.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 It is of silver or copper and the head is higher; from under the chin do the ligaments come loose; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture you wish to use for enemas, then tie it between the two breasts with a strong double thread, heat that moisture on the fire; then pour the contents into the enema tube, then stretch your hand around the bladder as soon as all the moisture reaches the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle with it, and puncture it roundly in between; then thread the strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle like closing an opening, and put inside what oil, moisture, and water you wish to see, and tie up this instrument; and do as if you did with the bladder, squeezing by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have explained in the division the methods of stone removal and medicines used for extraction; we have described the difference between stones that are embedded like thorns, all signs indicating a stone, and how to treat certain types of stones; we will also address treatment concerning the bladder and penis.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones embedded in the bladder occur more often in children, and it is indicative of water from the bladder spilling out like a spring; they have frequent urination, painful erection of their penises, and frequent emission of semen; these symptoms are quite common among them until about 4 years old. It is very severe in elderly men, moderate for those between youth and middle age, and the cure is easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to evacuate all feces from within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For at no time does it obstruct the removal of stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet and stand them up straight, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladebox, and never ascends higher; then make him sit between your hands properly positioned, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined forward; then seek out and touch within. If you feel the stone in the space, quickly proceed to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not pass entirely upon touching, grease your left index finger with oil from the hand; if the patient is young or in puberty, use your middle finger; then insert into its foundation, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, widen at the neck of the bladamoile; then press above your finger, and push down wherever you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and command that he extends with his right hand the joints above, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the joint where the cutting takes place; then he applies the plastering paste, from which it takes its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And they make between those who are between the joints and the footing, not in the middle but on the left side of the snow; and it is straight above the stone, and your thigh stays there or at the footing, and the calf stretches out so that it is wide by deficiency, and within narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps it presses on the leg where the footing is, which jumps up without pain; and know if there are stones or angles, and borders: they should be easily removed; and if a portion that is softened, similar to a bud, and round, from which the evacuation is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 Where there are angles and borders, make the calf larger; and if it does not come out, then you must stretch it with tongs similar to a file at its head, in order to extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or use a subtle instrument bent at the top; and if you cannot manage this way, widen the opening slightly and if there is cortex, strain it with vitriol; and if there are more stones, first remove the largest from the bladder neck, then above, then the deeper ones, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, then it must be reduced, causing a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For there are two things that happen to the patient: either they die or urine continues to flow because their veins cannot be sealed; however, always strive in lancing and removing debris with tongs until you treat it piece by piece; after completely finishing your work, apply incense, aloe, dragon's blood, compresses, and lay a pillowcase filled with oil and wine or rosewater and cold water to cool the inflammation; then secure the patient on their back and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the joint is raised quite well with oil and water, then treat it with finaliagon ointment and basiliagon ointment until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosions occur, and blood congeals in the bladder, causing urine retention; since this is known to come out without effort along with the urine: thus open your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will cause swelling of the bladder, and scrotum. Then cleanse the wound with water and ease, and attend to all aspects as you know how, until it is healthy; and it must be that any boils you treat, you should tie off its two thighs, and apply medicines at the location.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it leads from the penis, and becomes lodged, and urine cannot pass; as I say to treat this thus, you shall stretch many times with an easing of straining during this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this as such.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this shape and it is with three sharpened ends in one piece of wood:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a filament and wrap it around the rod underneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the drill gently into the rod until it reaches the stone; turn the drill in your hand at the stone slowly, as long as you can pierce through to the other side of the stone; urine will flow shortly after, and then press down with your hand on what remains inside the stone within the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it breaks immediately and flies out with the urine, and the patient is relieved; if you cannot do this due to any obstruction, then take a filament underneath the stone and another on top, then make the rod at the spot between the two strings, then extract it forcefully, remove the string, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	From women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There are times when stones occur in women, and if they do so occasionally, the treatment is difficult due to three things: firstly, because perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and secondly, there cannot always be found a woman who knows how to undress before witnesses, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third way is that sometimes you cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's body is further along than the man's, which requires a deeper incision and causes great fear; if it becomes necessary to do so, one must engage a midwife who is well-versed, without charge, and if none can be found, seek out a very skilled mire (midwife); and present them with an able woman or a female knowledgeable in part of the art, and command her to perform what you order regarding the examination of the stone; and look carefully to ensure that the woman is a virgin. Then it's necessary for her to position herself correctly by placing one foot or foundation and seeking the stone; if she finds it, she should hold it down from its place, and advise her to put her foot or hand with the patient, pressing firmly against the bladder area.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is dislocated, one must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder up to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then at the pubic bone near the meeting of the hipbone, where it appears bent, and feels like a stone in that area; do not move its knee over or under the stone, but support it with something small; then place a lever on top of it, if you feel the stone so grip the wound until the stone can be removed easily, and know that there are many types of stones: namely, they can be small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and some have grains.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you feel similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 If the sinew does not yield, then apply saltpeter paste to it and keep it wrapped for an hour until it is numb; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm, and use the dressings that I have told you in the extraction of stones at home to help you in your work; if the sinew does not yield, and it involves a vessel which has burst, apply powder on the area and bandage with strips and binds, do not repeat this again, leave the stone as is and do not irritate it further unless the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood is calmed, and the limb stiffens, return to your work until the stone is firmly in place.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia causing flesh protrusions
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Applying moisture is nothing but a gathering of mucus or pus, which lies under the edge of the joints, contained in the vein; and it is called "pus," and never properly within the lining of the vein, if one believes it to be another kind of fluid; and this is the leather between the white pus we have mentioned; and such things do not occur often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the creation of this dislocation results from weakness at the joints, where that material is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And never if there is bruising around the joints, and this discoloration has many shades: it can be yellowish in decline, without redness, or black, or watery white, and this occurs often; these are signs to recognize this assembly because if it is as we have described, then they are abscesses of reason, short like the shape of an egg, and do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 If it is moisture in the proper cloth, then there are pus-filled sores with part of the shirt, and since one thinks it's another piece; and if the moisture is between the leather of the joints and the white fascia, they feel it well; therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, touch all around indiscriminately, which determines its shape as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the introduction, judge according to what is found within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be bared according to his ability and body repletion; then he lies on his back, slightly elevated, and covers himself with many layers of cloth; then lie down on your left side, and command the attendant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the hip joint; then take a spatula, scrape the leather between them along their length up to the knuckles, ensuring the incision is straight while avoiding the bone, and carefully cut it as skillfully as possible; then pierce the white fibrous tissue evenly with water wide enough to drain all fluid, and apply bandages, extending the tissue forward; but touch only the fibrous tissue, not the ribs themselves. Remove or divide the cartilage delicately in one piece or parts equally, if you do not cut it precisely, fluid will return; and if the flesh tears at your work, reposition it when finished with the procedure of the white tangle; then suture together the two halves of his rib cage with stitches like other wounds until healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint corrupted with another disease, it is necessary that you tie off any vessels that are dilated, suspecting blood flow; then cut away the entire pouch, drain it, and treat as we have said before.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if the bone is joined in two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; then bind the other part as you did with the first equally, then let out some blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil on the wound; also provide another moistened linen in wine and oil, and place upon both ends, and over quilted cloths, and lay a bandage to cover everything according to this method.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two pieces of cloth and impregnate them with shredded linens in this manner and join them together by sewing at the girdle of the breeches; one piece is attached to the base up to the back, and the other to the part near the elbow; the remaining two are joined over both armpits, and they are then secured with a belt around the trousers. This method of cauterization does not require iron incisions, but rather use a fine scalpel-like cautery as we have mentioned before, cutting through the skin at the joints, and scraping it down with this delicate hot cautery until the white flesh containing blood is revealed; then take the appropriate cautery tool as instructed, pierce the lymph nodes, and scrape with this heated cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cup in all ways you see fit, as long as you achieve everything; and ensure that the fire does not touch the vein; and know this work is more healing; and with careful monitoring of blood flow, and moving when necessary from incision; and if anything happens contrary to what has been said, such as abscesses or bleeding or other things, then treat what goes against it, according to what was previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this treatment due to its severity, then prepare perforation as I have told you, and that when you are certain by the meanings we have said about draining being proper, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess at the part opposite to all the tissue around it wide, and insert the perforate along its full length of body; ensure the holes are large enough that all water flows freely through them; then put cotton over the hole, tie it off, and let any remaining fluid drain out; then treat until the wound is healed; and if a bandage does not allow the liquid to seep from the opening of the wound, it is necessary for you to insert a straw or instrument used in treating droplets as we have described before; then enlarge the hole of the webs so that fluid returns, and know that after six months or less, when it gathers again as before, once gathered like this, the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of the veins
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In this part of the branch, there are fearsome conditions in which I believe it is better left alone; and I will tell you about the workings and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the joints; and this happens very often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is known by excessive bitterness and ague, which spreads to the joints or through percussion; and the color of an abscess varies according to the person's complexion; it does not cause pain and is a severe abscess; sometimes there are frightening and piercing boils with foamy colors that do not originate from our arteries or veins swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from our artery, it is known by the hot abscess's appearance when you squeepress it between your thumb and finger; one should not even touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 The one who is made of swelling of veins is known by their disposition to the expression through touching the joints, and can well make an incision in this manner, and in other chariots; and cut off the core of the knees, then extend the lump upwards, and pull forth the white fascia, and release the suspensory from all parts of the lump.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the lump is already settled with these nerves touched, then it is necessary to draw out the lump and cut; and if there are arteries at the white fascia or within those veins, it is necessary to release all of that tissue and roundly excise.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthmark is located behind it, then you must wrap all of that and extract the leg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	te* 380;
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of the veins
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enveloped in a wrapping resembling a node, with the softening of joints, and it greatly moves when he goes; and the treatment for this illness is as fearful as this one before, nonetheless we shall inform you about its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the seat with elevated feet, then apply a suspensory belt around their knees and all limbs close to the thighs, stretch them out; then bandage sharply across both sides of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it at the first spot where blood appeared, and secure firmly to the other end; then bandage evenly according to the body's length, and treat any corrupted moisture; then dress the wound as with other bow injuries, ensuring that no vessel becomes infected or causes weakness in one of the limbs; because by this way there is no harm, and if blood comes from all vessels, it is necessary to bandage the limbs on all sides; so that the bones do not lose their strength due to the cutting of vessels.
de la routure dou syfac	with m: n'set20 you cite:
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The effects of this remedy involve either cutting the abscess or extending over the belly in the area of the groin, causing the intestines to protrude from that opening; and this protrusion is due to an abscess or extension, occurring through various means: by impact, jump, scream, lifting a heavy burden, among similar things; and the signs when it's caused by the extension of an abscess are slow and gradual onset over a long time, not sudden; and the boils are equally distributed up to the forehead because the abscess presses the intune.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the sack, which brings sudden pain at the beginning and diverse abscesses appearing from beneath the skin, for the issue of the intestines and the body due to a perforated sack.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And at no time do the winds with the intestines, and are retained therein, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron out of fear, so it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The method of the treatment is that you instruct the patient to retract the intestines into their hand within the wound if it can re-enter; then hold steady over its neck between your hands, lift the buttocks; then extend the head upwards and cover all the skin around the groin with a long strip of something suitable for opening the wound, using such strips that you can pull out hairs through them; then scrape off the white abscess above the skin, until it's completely removed from all sides; then insert your index finger into the area between the white abscess and the groin skin, as well as between the second abscess and where they meet, separating what is behind that to the tailbone, and between the second abscess; and move with your right hand under the head of the groin, lift the white abscess upwards towards your left hand, and bring all of it towards the belly; then command the assistant to extend the area upward, and unfasten whatever is behind the fastening; and tie if you find any intestine protruding or a tough white abscess, and if you find anything, put it back through the abdomen. Then take a needle made of nine strands of thread, and insert it at the rear part of the abscess behind the groin; after that, gather together all hairs from the threads, as many as four strands come to hand; then assemble them one over another in a cross shape and bind the abscess (which is below the skin around the groin) with a strong bandage made of two parts; then wrap the hairs with filaments and tie them together so tightly that nothing can enter or escape from any pore, preventing any pus from emerging. Finally, place the initial bandage as long as the second one was previously placed, and adjust all other bandages according to their size, ensealing the entire abscess except for a width of two fingers at its head; after that, apply clean lint soaked in oil on parts where there is no scraping or hairs.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is the fistula sealed by fire after incision if there is concern about blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens, and leave the tie until it breaks on its own; and if it lags in healing, apply warm water, and do as we have said, until it breaks; then treat the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly well again.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia causing flesh protrusions
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said it is made as a joint that has been fused together like tying vessels, after cutting near the ears lightly on both sides; then bind around me, and treat the abscess from which blood flows until the vessels break; and heal it as we have described, until it is perfectly well again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Never does rupture come between the ankles as we have described, and open his eyes; and do not let any of the intestines be cut with scissors, and if they are cut, it is little and heals quickly; but if it stays too long at this point, a wound or abscess forms until the intestine breaks out again; and this happens by the stretching inward into an abscess as we have described, because it is extended, then softened and swollen the eyes are open and wide; and treat with cautery, as we have before said; and never treated with iron in this manner: whereby the sick man lies on his back between your hands, then cut the swolamoideen area according to the quantity of three pieces of wax; then extract the abscess that is under the skin, then take the thread and put it over the area near the abscess; and press in the middle towards the belly, then close both sides of the abscess on top of the head with the thread, and pull each one; then extract the knot from the thread, and do not extend or cover anything else around the abscess, as I have made you aware in treating abdominal intestines rupture; then treat by wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bind the wounds, if it becomes infected and treat the injury, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is distorted, and has no appearance in the region, and the fire cautery is moved too much at this place, closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Of softening due to dampness of the leather thongs.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of thongs becomes soft in some homes because the wheels inside are made malleable and it is seen; and when one wants to cure them, they make the patient lie on their back with the breechcloth placed over the natural skin; then join the two edges with a single seam, and if you look at it, first remove the excess soft leather by three or four firm stitches; then stitch between the stitches as other wounds until they are healed completely, and lick the thread.
dou chastrement	By gentle handling
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Indeed, treatments such as this are mentioned in our law, and I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; but they are necessary for two reasons: firstly, so the master may respond with treatment when asked; secondly, because we often need animal control methods like those of goats, sheep, dogs, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say that treatments are done in two ways: by attraction or by piercing.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the method we use by attraction, make the animal sit in warm water until its joints are softened and pliable; then grip with your hand, until it is repositioned and you no longer feel any resistance.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 From the treatment of cutting: it is necessary to secure the animal, and press its skin with your left hand's leather pouches, then tie the suspender, and cover each joint one by one after you have properly scorched them; leaving no trace of deep or subtle infection near the bones; this method of cutting treatment is more effective than that done through attraction, because with attraction sometimes nothing remains on the joints causing the animal to crave release; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	On hermaphrodites: they are beings with both male and female sexual characteristics or reproductive organs. Their nature is a subject of great curiosity and concern in medical texts, often attributed to various causes ranging from divine intervention to environmental factors. In medieval medicine, understanding and treating such conditions required careful observation and knowledge of the humoral balance within the individual's body. Treatment approaches could include dietary adjustments, herbal remedebies, or other interventions aimed at restoring bodily harmony.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphrodite according to two ways in men: one where between the two testicles there is also as the shape of female nature, and sometimes it secretes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is for women, and it occurs on their finger as well as a rod and its cord.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment of men and women involves removing all obstructed stones, and treating them as other wounds would be; in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks through the sheath's skin, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Removal of tainted or malign influences (i.e., surgical intervention to remove cancerous growths) is necessary for healing.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 A stone causing obstruction in its natural location can be so unsightly to look at; and some women have it as large as their hand, and that is the treatment for it.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary to grasp the excess of the stone with your hand or fingernail and chop lightly; do not cut too deeply, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it further until it heals completely. And for a stone found at the mouth of the urethra, its opening, and possibly leaking out inadvertently, and resembling a cow's pussy, this is what was called by olden times 'the kowe disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to treat, as we have said in the method, continue until it is healed.
de erratique	Of querns
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 Erratic when the nature of woman is not perceived or her lap is small; and it is innate by birth, or arises from disease that has come upon them; or it occurs due to a hard blow, or subtle syphilis or speed, and they become so in their marrows, or ribs, or sides, or elsewhere; and it prevents conception, pregnancy, and possibly the ability to give birth; and recognizing this is done through the observation of urine.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If hemorrhages appear frequently, sometimes in the ankles or legs.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is under the saddle and subtiles in two places, hurry there and so: place your two index fingers together, have the woman lie on her back with spread legs; then extend the two spits fully, until the subtle syphilis appears reddened, and it shows signs of healing; then take wool, grind into oil, and apply to the area, and let the woman rest each day so that she can recover.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syphilis is hardened and spreading, it is necessary for you to cut around the tumor resembling a sprig of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the ulcers are bloodshot, soak them with lime and cut away; then apply healing medicines such as dragon's blood, frankincense, and plenty of egg yolk; then dress a wide wool bandage to prevent closure of the wound; thus continue until it is cured completely. Then prepare a tent of clean linen; and so on treatments until they are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 When a boil comes to suppuration or healing, it must be covered according to this method, unless there are advanced abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an advanced abscess in the boil, one should not disturb it with fire or heat.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Edemies are usual veins without change, and when edemies become old they turn into thorns; we have discussed in the section their appearances among others, their signs, and I will now say those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that edemies and thorns when they are fully in the boil do not appear to be felt, except for treatment by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are at the mouth of the boil can be felt and treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Then it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend her leg on tongs, and wrap the wound at its roots, then powder with binding medicines such as dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things; then soak her feet for an hour in warm water, then place her in cold water; if bleeding persists, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple bark and gallnuts, and similar things, and then take barley flour, and prepare it with honey and egg yolk, and make a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if she recovers, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 But if not, apply pneumatic cups to her back and limbs without causing pain; then take linen, and milk it in nettle or elder juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the abscess rests, treat it with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" turns red, resembling a chief as if sharp pain occurs, cover it as I have previously mentioned in the tutorial; then tend to it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many ways of abscess occur in the flesh: like cancer and purulent abscess, herpes, itching diseases, fistulas, hemorrhoids, scalded abscesses, and other ailments I have mentioned in the section on divisions.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore I must now describe the scalded abscess in this treatise that occurs in the flesh, which is not like other abscesses that form pus; and if you want to know how to perform surgery with iron, observe whether the abscess has heat and fever at its onset, and if it turns red when seen.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not rush to cut it, but let the pain be eased first by making it bleed; and then have the patient sit on a seat, with two small seats or whatever they lean against, supporting their back and arranging their limbs as needed for the affected leg; ensure their thighs are spread apart, placing their arms under their knees, securing them well with a good ligature. Then turn the blade to the right side of the chest, and prepare the instrument used in working on the mouth of the marrow groove, after which comes the formation; it is necessary that when you see this instrument being prepared, insert the probe first to determine the depth of the marrow cavity so that what enters from the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not hurt the patient. And if the extensions are larger, cover the depth of the marrow cavabg with a cloth so that the extensions do not cause pain; and place the horn of the instrument above, and dip the instrument in liquid.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 When abscesses are opened and the area is treated gently with hands, if necessary cover it at the top, swathed in a bandage; and when the bowel is emptied, one must place moistened pads of linen soaked in rose oil or dry green olive oil into the wound; then put a firm dressing from the front edge of the muscles to the area behind and along the joints, cleaned with fresh water or vinegar that have been boiled; then treat it after two days of ointment application until healed; occasionally lifting the muscles and wound by an enema using water and honey, followed by water mixed with lily root and aristoloche, long when cooked; then return to ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed on the arm, one must refrain from using iron treatments, but tend to it as we have discussed in the section.
de l’enfantement	Childbirth refers to the process of delivering a baby from the mother's uterus into the world outside. It involves labor and delivery stages, which can vary greatly among individuals. Pain management, monitoring for complications, providing support during contractions, and ensnaring the newborn safely are all critical aspects of managing childbirth effectively in a medical setting.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It's necessary first for the birth attendant to recognize the natural presentation of childbirth and signs when a woman starts pushing, desires fragrance, which then quickly prompts the infant to be born. Then you know that these childbirths follow the natural figure, with issues arising from the head and second twins alongside; and when seeing these signs, one should gently press her belly so that the baby is delivered soon because as it descends over its head, the second twin follows, and the maternal blood vessels are properly cleansed through good hygiene. And those who come otherwise do not arrive naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 At no time does it come upon his feet, and comes forth either the body or the head, and the hands, where it comes upon his belly, or throat, and is turned by chance about his neck, and other malicious shapes; so it is necessary for the barber to be wise and subtle in these matters, and free from error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as how one should assist him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes down naturally from under his head and the woman labors heavily, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; and apply to her nature oils like fenugreek cooked, and then give the midwife between her thighs the small spatulous tool of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And cuts the secondine, and copulates with its knob until the moisture inside runs forth; and presses a woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, one must enema the woman with an emulsion of fenugreek in oil of sesame; then have her lie down to strain and expel mucus for an hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 If the arms are stiff, one should gently and repeatedly reset them; if they cannot be inserted, place a seat under her, and lift her feet upwards; then remove the seat from the ground, support the woman so she does not fall while standing, and if the arms still cannot be placed properly and the child is dead, use a strap to guide the hands that was previously set, and extract the child, resetting them evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 Upon the expulsion of the child with its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out with its feet, one should push it upwards gently; then turn it slowly until it is levelled; and finally grasp the legs and extend them gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it reaches as far as the thighs, then command to press on it, and make it sneeze from its condition; if it leaps, so may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it cannot be turned as we have said, turn it slightly until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it should be lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come forth as we have described, then take musk extract, and olive oil, and melted gum resin, and grind all together in a mortar; place the nature of the woman within and pour this balm over it, then make her sit up on a fresh towel until under her ribs; and when she is sweating there, give her an ear trumpet from myrrh, and place it downwards, leaving it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and strain the mouth and nostrils, and gently press the abdomen, as now the child will leap.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the dislocation of a child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, the healer places his hands little by little; then let it be lying on its back, and hangs its legs downward, and lies as if gasping for breath on a bed; and folds its hands little by little, then presses its hands on its belly, and lifts up its bottom until it's aligned properly; and if the child does not cry out, shape its legs correctly, then move its belly forward, then he places his hands; and gently moves the child little by little; and commands the woman to squeeebreach as long as the child is being born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of a child, during which they urinate with one hand raised.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to engineer bringing the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, make her stand up and move; if she cannot walk, lay her on a bed with her legs in proper form; then arrange the bandages as I have described; and if she does not give birth, sit her on a chair, then study how to bring the hand back; and gently guide the child according to its natural state, and make her sneeze, and command that she pushes as long as the baby is being born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of dislocation of the child at its neck, and extend its hands, with its face turned toward its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the barber washes his hand, then turns it little by little and wipes gently; and when it is equalized, place on the musk-based powder and oil as we have said, then command that it be moved slightly and slightly; and once you have done this, let her sit in a chair, and command that she blinks; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, for all secondary procedures
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes about in this manner for the second time, you must cup your fingernail so that all moisture is emptied; and if an object becomes lodged against its face and neck, grip it without holding back, causing the object to move outwards; then place the child inside as needed until properly positioned, and command the woman to blink occasionally: then do so gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the origin of gangrenes
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	;
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 There are two things that do not live and have no name, I know them, they multiply, and are displaced by the syphilitic who directs them, which is linked to bubonic; and none of them come out naturally like a sore under the skin as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they erupt suddenly, and the treatment is as we have said, and it involves subtle handling, and quickly performs what it does; thus causing them to move towards healing.
de plusors enfans	Of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are never formed in the first or second or third or fourth or fifth or sixth or seventh degree, nor up to fifteen, but rather they take shape like an infant by the wise measurement of their severity, and it is suitable that the practitioner understands all this because occasionally similar things happen; thus acting according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of a child who has died
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman of a dead or pregnant child as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you must perform manual labor; if the woman is healthy in virtue, without accident or fear of death; she should be placed supine with her head elevated and legs raised; then apply heat to half of her body while lying on the bed so that she cannot reach below the child; next rub the clitoris with oiled musk gum resin and fenugreek seeds, then anoint her hands with these oils and substances; then lightly insert it into the vagina until the testicles are visible and be careful if the fetus is descended on its head; place the testicles in any of these places: under the arms or neck or mouth or upper palate or below the beard or chin or sides, and if it's above the feet, insert near the fingers or rib cage; you must anoint one testicle with your right hand, put a pouch between your thumbs with your left hand, gently press the testicle into any of these places until it achieves its purpose:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then make against the other pin or the point as needed, so that the extractions are even; and then extend them equally by moving from one side to the other in order for the pins to come out, and have the points sharp enough to hold the movements, just as shown here.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains stuck, apply oil to any of its joints and move it to that area, and treat the other part; and if nothing remains, place this pin or higher, continuing until all pieces are fully separated.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back together by pressing, it is necessary to wrap a cloth around above I finger, until it is fully separated; then apply heat at the joint of the palm or elbow, and thus do this on the other hand as well for both hands.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 Et si la tête de l'enfant est grosse et il est difficile à traiter en raison de son âge, ou qu'il ait du venin sous le cuir chevelu, alors il faut utiliser un cautère épineux placé entre les deux yeux pour faire enfler la tête et retirer le poison; ou tu l’appliqueras à l’instrument appelé « almidach », par lequel elle se forme avec des onguents ou cataplasmes qui vont après cela ; ainsi de même, faites que l'enfant ait une grande enflure naturellement; et puis tire-les-vous les os aux pinces à linge, et si la tête saute fortement et est restreinte par force, ce qui se fend jusqu'à la moiteur qui sort ; et s’elle ne peut pas sortir, alors coupez en morceaux autant que tu le peux ; et s’il enfle au ventre ou sous les côtes, il faut percer jusqu'à ce que la moiteur sorte.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	the
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If it is difficult in the belly or udder, you must stretch it with a drape wrapped around the hand; emptying the belly or udder until all moisture has been removed; and if other members are ached, and the head remains dislocated, then you should place your whole hand into the marrow, pulling it to its mouth; then insert an awl or needle, and thread through firmly; and if the opening of the marrow is closed due to an abscess that has formed inside, do not exert yourself, instead provide moist and fatty substances; and apply them generously, soaking in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 If the child is on its back, and you can place it upright, do as we have described for a live infant; and if possible, cut through in segments, leaving nothing of the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, if inflammation comes in the bones as we have said about abscesses, then apply a tight bandage to stop the blood flow and provide further treatment.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	s; the t or le:
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came an abscess on his elbow, which swelled so much it covered the area, and began causing great suffering.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to seek treatment, but thought long and hard, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed under a strong attractive force, and out came an os (bone), and after some days others too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	l's, et les t, and y; prist; ous est la ou.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I have the wound and injured hand, until it was much improved; and he remained thus for long times, and was slightly better afterwards; but this chapter is forgotten because when masters encounter strange things, they know how to put them right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To reset the head of the thigh to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of pressure, where there are two books; and at two corners, there are two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in fitting, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouthpiece of the fist-hole must be wide, and the margin of the trees must match, with a length of one palm and a half; and between the two holes there are two adjustments of the same piece, which should fit firmly in both places for about a half palm or slightly more; these two adjustments open into the mouthpiece of the marrows when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in its make from ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of pincers; it should have two heads on either side, as you see, a palm wide and two fingers broad; and when you open the mouth of all instrument, make the woman sit up with legs apart and feet hanging down, then place both sides together in the hole, hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as if made like pincers equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the maris, until it does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all made of horn, and there are various kinds resembling them; and when the master has prepared them, the work is quicker, and higher at home for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not discard the instrument before it has been properly prepared, because its needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to command the patient to keep her alley in place, and then extract any condition present, holding her hands at the mouth and nose; and if she jumps through that, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, you may take it out yourself, and make a spoon or lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare (mother), such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia ginger, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, may be boiled in water over the fire; then place a spoon or lid into the pot, with the other end in the mouth of the mare (mother), and wait until vapors come inside the mare (mother); then you can make it cough, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the smallpox is severe.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it remains after this treatment and is not cured, command the bailiff to moisten his left hand with sesame oil or musk extract, then place it back in nature, seeking its second form; when found, grasp and stretch it slightly straight so that the sinews do not pull out during extraction; but gently move it to the right and left, then twist. It will come and disengage.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the sinew is extended, we have advised the cure of inducing coughing and fumigating with herbs; if not healed by all that we have said, do not attempt to treat it yourself; however, for what is at the mouth of the slete, tie it to a woman's thigh, then enema with medicinal concoction; this will draw out and return it, making it strong again. But always, if it emits a foul odor affecting the stomach and head, causes nausea in the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then it is necessary to perform fumigations with incense at this place: none of the ancient ones have tried the fumigation of dried parsley and figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and secondary sex organs is thus:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It is as if it resembles a hinge, and places the head delicately in nature, with wide shoulders near the fire; and there are fumigations over embers, and the lichen until it is consumed, then starts anew another.
de percier lou fondement	Of cutting below the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The child is born without the proper foundation being felt but rather with a subtle tear: so it behooves the midwife to cut through that tear properly, and not merely pierce the skin at random, ensuring she does not touch any vital parts; then place greasy cloth in wine and oil, followed by ointment treatment until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you suspect that it may pop out again, then place or a thonged leather strip and let it rest for some days, and be operated on when the child wishes to go about in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And this type of healing of a wound or abscess does not occur often; if such treatment is needed: apply the leather strip as we have mentioned before.
de la fistule dou fondement	Of the anal fistula at its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that arise from the foundation are inflamed and grow near or below it, within two parts, either as one fistula or multiple; when such an inflammation is long-standing, they work, and moisture brings forth clear or subtle pus, never these fistulas heal on their own; they are known by the fact that there is discharge or windiness when the patient has a bowel movement, and sometimes it happens to pass one worm.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	s t this.  M. oucquest. Ittutor the c's their.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one finds the persistent abscess at the base, not bleeding: and it is that you push your index finger or thumb to the base, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the abscess when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is twisting, if you insert a fine plum blossom or horse hair with your finger until you feel the thread or hair on your finger; and if you do not feel it, nor does pus or wind arise as we have said: know that it does not penetrate.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	dislocaté sont bon. Neris; puis que tu esque poilz est se and is rude les tient maistandiés designe. 340; Thene chirote de qu'est not the liet: d’in, then anfraid tots and bones of dises lont et they aret la gist:
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the thread comes out from there; if there is no twisting and the pain subsides completely, then one must pull it back in with both hands; and for these persistent abscesses, there are no cures that medicine or ointments can provide, only hard work and folly of those who attempt to meddle.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In the case where there is no fear and it is not an old injury, with hope of healing by fer (iron), as I have tested, and that the patient lies between your hands on their back; raising their legs up to their thighs, tilting their thighs towards their belly; then place a tent of linen or cotton if there is any twisting, until you know where it goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around the pelvis, then you must insert your index finger there if you detect a swelling; and when you feel between your thumbs the sacrum or the cartilage, then know that it is painful; but do not touch there unless one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 At any time it can be properly healed, but this rarely occurs; and the aid that is applied is to carefully apply the subtle caustic according to the size of the fistula as previously mentioned; and pouring hot oil into the fistula until reaching near the foundation; doing this two or three times, knowing when these threads become molten which are similar to a feather of a bird; then treat with burred thread until it is secured, followed by ointment soothing and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If otherwise it cannot heal; and if it is between but does not pierce to the foundation, provide thick coverings of wax or syphaca between your two fingers over the fistula, observing where the covering protrudes from the fistula as you begin; then pour in the caustic before securing with ties, and continue afterward; doing so until reaching to the top of the tie. The tie will be released, washed away; then treat those threads that appear like a feather of a bird without leaving any residue.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if blood is drawn out, and cut between your hand and the wound, so heat it with fire or medicinal pitch.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery brings together two things: first, the heating of dislocated joints, and the stopping of bleeding and removal of moisture; then the treatment of soiled linen with boiling pitch or ground chalk, until it is saturated with wetness, and ensure no blood remains in the joint; then treat the wound from sudden burns caused by a hot branding iron, and are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, then it is healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the base of the foundation, and is pushed away from the body, then you may touch his toe or foot, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent and find that there is cloth or flesh or cartilage, and it is nearly perforated, then only have faith and hope through the administration of one of three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut to the bone, or if possible, treat with tents as first; do not pull too hard, so that you don't cover the structure that holds the foundation, allowing for spontaneous ejections; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy again, or remove that covered layer and cleanse after being cut near the foundation, or by tent or another sharpened instrument; then identify the displaced cartilage in the wound, as much as you can see; then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula at the part forward of the foundation: it would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 At no time are there fistulas according to this manner: when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is near the foundation below the skin's surface, then take a pierced tent in accordance with this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	the gma; they c
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is adjacent to the foundation within the skin's surface, then remove the thread of that pierced tent and tie your finger or foundation with it; twist off the head of the thread, and join both heads together, strain one against the other, leaving for a day or two; hold them in place each time until the threads have fused where they are between, and then treat the wound until it is sutured and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, make it punctured in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not require the use of a probe for such deeply seated ones, and then treat it, as we have said, until they are healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the spatulous pine needle used to make a fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; however, on the other side it is not as such that you do not cut what should not be cut, as you see here.
des emorroydes	From the hands of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 The dislocations come in two ways: those that are within the foundation like a grain of resin, with small and large ones, causing blood to accumulate at the base, sometimes there is one or more, they weaken the foundation and its head; but those which have lost moisture have little moisture, and cause yellowish fluid or some blood and retain body color; the treatment for those within the foundation requires that you instruct the patient to sneeze so they can move to chambers until the base is lifted, and veins appear; if rushed, cut them with pincers as close to your nail, then grasp at their roots; if the pincer cannot hold due to moisture, take them with a thread or swatch of silk; remove it between your fingers, then grind over warm powders present for cautery; alternatively, you can cauterize as stated in the chapter on cautery because these remedebly heal until they are healthy; if the base cannot be lifted, enema the patient with a sour and harsh clister to cleanse what is at the foundation so it may protrude openly; when the patient rises, and veins become prominent on the foundation, the cure is easy; take them with your nail or pincers, grind over, then heal as we have said until they are healthy, preventing incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to dress the wound in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread upwards and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two loops of thread below the needle, and let it be wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needhole, and do so with all the others, leaving one point to absorb excess blood; then place a linen pad soaked in rose oil or cerote ointment on the wound base, and put it on, and instruct the patient to rest; and leave it until they stop bleeding, and when it is healed, treat with ointment and other remedies until it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Through the proper technique or foundational principles
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, constipation occurs in the intestines due to natural contraction and when illness is old and medicines do not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to scrape the surface of a spatula or your fingernail above, which does not allow it to become moistened; then cleanse until it is soft as appropriate; and if it cannot be softened, resume scraping more vigorously than before, until it becomes very smooth, and be scorched; then cleanse until it is thoroughly smooth.
dou fremit	Of great trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A formication is a small false appearance under the skin that spreads widely; and it never freezes into bone, feeling like deathly coldness, affecting the entire body, especially more in the hands than other areas.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the treatment is to take some feathers from an ostrich quill or a strong vulture feather and place that on the cold spot, until the pulsation disappears entirely; then turn your hand over the entire area with the feather as long as you cover it fully, drying it out completely, and scrape away the coldness at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a band of lin or iron according to this form, and be subtle below and traverse above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not perceive it for holding with two hands and pressing together, and if you see it, cauterize the swelling as in front or by means of fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	s; If:
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At no time is an enema made of silver or brass, or melted lead or metal; and at no time are any of these small and large suppositories prepared according to the method in which they are mixed.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those that are treated in children's care and who are weak and painful, are small [suppositories].
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is made on a wide area or the belly is tied according to this manner: [Here should follow instructions for tying/preparing the patient for an enema].
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and it has an inversion or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the shoulder pierced inside; and to one of the sides I make holes, and on the other side too; and put the medicines from a bladder of beast or parchment into the belly, and pierce all around through small holes, ensuring equal spacing between each hole, then thread strong coarse thread through these holes creating a circle, like a she-goat's belly; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong filament of twisted thread at the front, then perform an enema; this forms the circular shape.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and rub the head of the enema with oil or goat butter or similar substance, then gently pour it in; then allow the minister to extract using both hands together until all is emptied, remove the enema, and lift the patient's legs off the bed so that the medicine may come out as much as possible; if he sleeps through an entire night, this provides greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you administer an enema due to intestinal disorder, and the patient's condition improves quickly, then it may recur until they are healthy again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 If the hemorrhoids are at their foundation or abscessed, then use a subtle enema as for a child; and this is how to prepare the subtle enema through which the bowels are restrained.
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in wound treatment; now we will speak of treatments for hands and general medicine, according to the method's completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what means or locations the cuts are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are from piercing of stones, and sharpening swords and knives or lances or clubs or similar objects; or those that occur naturally on the body as in wounds where blood flows from the neck, head, genitals, abdomen, liver, or limbs. And I will tell you the cure for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds since memory recalls its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 When a simple wound or chief occurs and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's from a stone throw or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound large, causing you to suspect of a hot abscess: immediately dress the head mainly if there is little blood flow from the wound, and apply the remedy opposite to the affected area; prevent the patient from repletion with wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he does not want to dress it, let him eat less meat, and drink no wine or fatty food; place over the wound, if an abscess comes, a soft cotton in oil only, or in stipulated wine; and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood and has not been moved by air or dust, I will tell you how much to use later; and if the hair grows back, apply ointments until healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's handle and of similar things, and the lips cannot join by themselves, then join them by suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, in stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed to bone, and raw, and holds only by a little bit; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hardened leather in its place, and instruct the patient to eat large meats such as tested cereals, roasted grains, also feathers.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or leather putrid, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut off all of it, and pour vinegar on it, then treat it; and if there is artery in the wound or vein without a clot, which cannot be stopped by medicines, then you must tie up the artery with any thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it involves applying this powder that softens as much as the salt has done.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The manner of the powder is as follows: take incense for one part; dragon's blood for two parts; vivid chalk for three parts, and grind the powder finely, apply to the wound, and firmly bandage it, until it is well aired out and joined with all its blood; then secure it tightly, and let it remain without slipping if it does not swell; because you do not remove the medicine until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do this with hot char only when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but the art has already healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the wound has moved due to this dislocation, particularly in its place, do not use this powder at all; but apply some digested ointments or boiled barley flour mixed with water and honey until it heals well; then treat it with other remedies as long as it is cured.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if there is a bone fracture with the wound, and it is small, extract using fine tweezers; and I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs at or near the neck and it is simple, there may be no difference between it and that of the head, but if the vein or artery of the neck has been cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is nerves, there is no other remedy than leaving the sore; do not apply anything constricting as it harms and draws back the nerves; also do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation extends to the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicines soaked in warm water with rose oil mixed and cooked again in warm water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then dress it with bandages and salve until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If wounds are deep and filled with blood, pierce or go below them; if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, stop it, ligate it, and cauterization may be needed; if throat spines or windpipe are cut, or eyesight affected, causing flesh to sag in its natural course, then push the skin back, not touching the throat but returning according to its natural shape; then gently stretch the area, leave for several days, and treat with medicated ointments until healed; if bone is compressed by a wound, work on it; if there are pieces of bone left unconnected, try to join all together, leaving those that cannot be joined until the wound shrinks, then remove and align properly; if the wound is fresh, apply powder as previously mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	; that t quis not m they n's lesse:; (et so far Clavud se cropleus the time is to, and so if you le s un modern with tha; If you haved. The original: Jum: are prickt-do not so ee, butnere.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound caused by a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, check if there's an unpleasant smell indicating that the patient has internal bleeding: understand then that the wound is deadly; but if it is not deep and contains fresh blood throughout, do not apply powder at once or bind with bandages to prevent blood from flowing out too much, allowing it to return to the body, causing blindness in the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and wrap twice a day; and if you don't have ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days or more; spasms or severe body shaking will not occur. And when you see good signs of recovery, understand that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Cure the tent-like protrusions and other remedies until they are healed; and if it cannot be healed or functioning, then believe that there is a fistula; so treat accordingly as one must.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or on the side or back, treat the part in front accordingly; if large, suture it up; and if small, apply powder, and if pieces are embedded in the bone, clean out the wound, remove any foreign bodies; and if there are none, let the wound heal over time, which will ease extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The falls of the belly are large and medium and small; from a major wound never once the intestines fall out or their nerves, causing an entry point for dirt; and suturing is more difficult, and no less severe is the minor wound than the major one, hence when resetting the intestines they require more pressure, if not done hot by hot; because the intestines swell almost immediately when they feel cold, thus they retract more easily, and therefore a superficial wound moves easier, thus cleaning of the intestines to their place is better than others. And know that the treatment of the belly falls into four ways: the two common sutures occur in the belly wound, and the suture from other bodily wounds and the remaining specialized sutures are common to other wounds; nevertheless they are more appropriate with the belly wound, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes, it requires little to reposition, either due to the size of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, prepare in one manner: moisten with an absorbent sponge or linen cloth soaked in warm water, or boil and strain the liquid, then inflate the intestine until fully swollen; do this repeatedly without pause to ensure expansion.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling diminish, moisten the intestine with warm or cold water as needed because that eases its insertion; if it cannot enter, make a small incision at the instrument used to remove thorns; the first treatment is to widen the opening, without needing significant cutting unless necessary; this creates an entry point: puncturing inside and not causing undue harm while maintaining the shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When the wound is swoln large and the intestines protrude outward, reset it back to its natural form in its proper place if you have the power, for this counts as movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is wide and located below the belly, it is necessary that you lay the sick person on their back with legs raised higher than their head; if it is located below the belly, raise the head and genitals higher than the body parts, and similarly arrange in such a way that the injured part is raised higher than the other. Thus, this arrangement applies to both large and medium wounds as I have described.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, arrange it as I have described; then take a clean piece of cloth and place it on the injury, bringing the edges together. This is the common way to suture wounds. You may use one or more needles depending on the size of the wound; leave an inch from the head of the wound open, and insert a needle with strong thread there. Pierce both sides of the skin through the underlying tissue until you have pierced that part, and gather the two edges together into four parts; then tighten doubled thread around the inserted needle, then join the edges of the wound as soon as possible, leaving another inch open, and insert another neednose. Attach the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop until all the wound is closed; use medium-sized needles neither too small nor too large: they should be just right so that fine ones cut through completely and larger ones cannot enter well; for this reason, one must use needles of moderate size. Do not place the needle holes far from the wound or skin as they will not close and heal properly before suturing. Cover the areas where the needles are with bandages so that you can move freely while sleeping, leaving them until the wound is closed; this method of suturing using needles is more suitable for small wounds because it may only require one or two stitches at a time and the same technique as sewing clothes. When you have pierced all four parts together with one needle, remove the needle from where you started, in the manner that threads are cut; then leave space between each suture equal to the thickness of an almond. This type of stitching is familiar to everyone and I stitched a wound on a man's abdard who had been injured with a knife, which was more than one palm wide in size and the intestines protruding were about two palms wide, and it was located within his abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine as it had been for twenty-four hours and treated the wound until day fifteen, and healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the physician believed he would die, but it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment as there were none available at that location or any remedies. Instead, twice in a day, I placed cotton on the wound and washed it with honey water until healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Or I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching: take the needle and insert it into the outer part up to where it has pierced the skin; when it feels right through from side to side, make the stitch with the same hole or seam where you inserted the needebut, and pierce another hole from that inner part outward until complete. The essence of this suture is like a furrier making pelts - leave one side unsewn once, then resew it on the other, continuing until the entire stitchwork is finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second manner of suture, which Galien calls proper, is done as follows: pierce a needle or a nearby skin flap, make an incision just there, leaving the two heads of the laceration; then turn the needle and pierce towards the part forward until inside those two heads of the laceration; then pierce both parts forward to other points in the skin that are opposite each other; and this is the proper manner of suture and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galen says this word and some attest to it: you must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; one needle is inserted from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the tear is within the belly, the suture is tighter than others on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds: when you find a fresh wound still bleeding and its parts moved, restore the intestines and the bowels; then apply powdered charcoal paste, and if its parts have been moved, apply any present ointment until it heals; compress with linen cloths soaked in salt solutions, and apply mirabolic juice; then treat the wound as other wounds until sane, and if you lack medicines, apply cotton ball paste, as soon as it starts to turn white twice a day until sane.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You do not need other medicine in various simple wound situations; and if you suspect that the wound has made communion with the major limbs, then grind linen lightly in oil of warm salt water or rose oil, placing it between the ankles, under the elbps; and if there is pain or putrefaction throughout, and this happens often, perform a vinegar no. 2 enema, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestine; open inside, and know that when it's the large intestines, it's easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are pained, and it is due to the swelling of veins that this occurs, as well as from the subtlety of the entire body and the proximity to its natural nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the barleycorn falls from the wound, reset it as you did with the intestines when they are fresh; and if it is old and has turned yellow or black, then you must remove the black part so that no blood vessels and arteries remain, and ligate what lies between them, placing two eyes hanging below the area above the wound to ease the extraction as barleycorns fall out, and the wound narrows.
de la routure dou boueil	in s, then as a les, or. It happens:
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be repaired in some cases because I have seen a man wounded by a lance; the injury was on the right side of the stomach, became inflamed, and turned into a fistula, causing evisceration and winds; I treated him as best I could, without ceasing to delicately suture until healed, resulting in strengthened tissues.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it healed, I doubted the patient had discomfort in his stomach; but there was no harm, only improved conditions, eating and drinking; some experimenters say that with a small intestinal wound, one should suture this way: take large threads, then bring together the edges of the wound, so when they are tightly closed, attach them to each other overlapping; then cover the area with gauze, and it stays secure as such that it cannot come undone, then apply a stitch in the same manner as before until the entire wound is closed; then remove the sutures.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 These heads in the intestine do not cause harm to the patient and can be joined by tying the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine, as follows: take the head of this thread of intestine that is well scraped, then tie it to the end of a fine linen thread, put the thread through the eyelet, and sew along the intestine; in this manner of stitching from flesh, there is no difference other than according to faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when located in one of the intestinal recesses, there is no remedy or health as long as it requires subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, or if there are any
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 That any wound or abscess, when it ages, is called "fistula" in general, especially if it swells and becomes inflamed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And fistula is a wrong condition that persists and hardens, without pain, growing as the feathers of a bird; at times clear and watery swelling, at other times thick; sometimes scarce, and at others sufficient; and I have discussed in the section on wounds, how any unhealed wound does not heal unless by one of the NINE causes: that is to say, because of the small amount of blood or flesh; or due to its nature being evil; or there being a hardening inside it and along the edges from which no pus emerges; or there being too much swelling; or the matter being in poor quality; or the medicine not being good for treatment; or because the corruption is a type of plague; or due to the region's properties causing late digestion, delayed healing and naturally fading away; or if it contains thorns or bone. And I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medicinal treatments in that division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for a fistula, which is done through handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Le fistule se trouve dans tous les membres du corps; car il y a des fistules qui apparaissent dans les grands vaisseaux, et dans les artères, et dans les nerfs, ou au foie, ou à l’intestin, ou à la vessie, ou aux côtes, ou à la colonne vertébrale du dos, ou à toute jointure des mains ou des pieds; et s'il apparaît avec propriété sur le membre principal, et dans les similaires.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 All fistulas of this type are difficult to heal and require only labor and ignorance; however, if there is a fistula that does not reach the locations I have mentioned, but you trust in its cure and see it verified, then take a tent made of silk or iron, depending on whether the fistula is straight, as for the ones that are twisted use a finer silk tent because silk bends easily around the curvature; if the firmula has multiple openings and you cannot properly locate it with tents, then dilute it by clisterizing through one of the orifices, as moisture quickly moves from one orifice to another, cleansing it. Then firmly grasp its strength at your discretion, asking the patient about any bone or nerve pain felt during hand pressure and the location where they feel it; when you accurately know the location of the fistula and whether it is distant from a joint, artery, vein, or the locations I have mentioned, then apply according to what I have said earlier, extracting any other decayed tissue within. Then continue treating until healed, and if the fistula is deeply situated in its right place, you must cauterize thoroughly, after which apply ointments made of medicinal herbs as needed, continuously pouring medicine to erode the excess material at the bottom; then apply anointments with a curative salve until it heals. If it does not heal using these methods, then proceed to cauterization as I have instructed, and if there is any corrupted bone from the fistula, excise accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If veins or principal limbs are not painful; as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, with corruption and darkness present, you should completely remove all infected bone before treating other matters until it is healthy again; and if it remains unhealthy, begin to dress it as before, remembering that you are not to go near fire: expose and extract it entirely until reaching the base, then restore its place; and if it becomes thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If that is not the case, know that the corruption is too extensive to be dealt with; there is no other remedy but for nature to take its course; and if there are small pieces of corrupted bone, you may extract them using pliers, then remove it with a suitable instrument like this; and if there are many bones, remove all of them without leaving any behind; and if moisture hinders the process, and there is no error or fear, protect the wound, maintain moisture, and liberate the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 If you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something that promotes putrefaction to the wound and let it be until the flesh is rotten around the bones; then the bones will have easier removal; and if it's a large bone, like of a leg or thigh, scrape away corruption until all the bone is exposed, then close the wound; and if there is a significant portion with putrefied flesh reaching to the bone, surround the entire area affected by corruption and cure it until solidified. And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in a man's leg, so take example and guidance for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 Once upon a time there were youths within thirty years who had pain in their leg due to something that came into the body until it reached the leg, and was carried away by a large abscess, and had no other reason for opening; but the physicians, through their folly, worked so much on it that they opened the abscesses, consuming much material, which became fistulas. From these many passages led to moisture and sweat throughout the body. Many doctors applied treatments therein for two years without any healing in the art of hands until I was called upon; and when I saw his leg and the medicines used on him, what flowed through the fistulas into large parts of the body. Thus the youth's body turned red, and had a citrine coloration.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I set up a tent in one of those places, and then searched all the places, finding that each faced the other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Therefore I proceeded and examined one of the places until I uncovered a part of the bone, finding it corrupted and perforated, extending to the internal bone; I assumed what appeared from the corroded bone that there was no other corruption except for that which I had shown, so I began restoring the wound with medicinal plasters over long periods but could not sew up. Then I started again and found the same in the bone as before; I kept finding the continuing corruption in the bone and showed it, then covered it, and attempted to stitch at that point. However, when I tried to wrap around an inch of the bone, the entire piece betrayed me completely, so I removed it with medicines again; this healed quickly and was sutured immediately, but did not start bleeding again unless due to the patient's weakness who could not endure, or from fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood is often distressing, but he was entirely unharmed, and in place of the bone arose a hard cartilage, which was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither on approach nor on departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then you should do it this way: take a line, and strain to the head of the bone that protrudes; and tie another thread from the same cloth larger than the first one, and tie it on top of the cartilage over the breadth, and extend its end so that when pulling, you tear out the corrupted cartilage at the bottom, revealing the healthy cartilage below where you see fit to work; do not let the thread slacken from the cartilage. And place a wisp or a small piece of cloth underneath the bone for covering the corrupted cartilage; and keep treating until it can be seen and felt that the corruption is gone, continuing treatment as needed.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the midst or a part, expose all skin; then remove scales from above, and then treat one part to another of the corruption, ensuring your approach matches what we have said; if the corruption is at the joint, separate the affected joint, and treat the bone as it extends on either side; and if the corruption continues through two joints, there is no other condition than painful swelling; and if the corruption is in the wrist or ankle, that area is particularly vulnerable, but nonetheless you must seek out this corrosion and how it opens; cleanse thoroughly using all methods available to you, except where veins or nerves may be obstructed; understand that instruments for cutting bone and sutures are numerous, depending on the position of the bones and their appearance, as well as thickness and subtlety, size and smallness, hardness. For this reason it is necessary to equip each work with its appropriate instrument; know that practice will reveal the instrument you need based on your knowledge in this art, and evidence from handling diseases; so consider carefully which tool you require according to what is required.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 When the shoulder is dislocated due to bone fragments or from being too far gone; and when you have applied medicine for that deterioration through medicinal treatments, but they do not help, then cover up the affected limb until it reaches the level where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient may escape death or wickedness, which is greater due to the failing of the limb; and the signs are such that the limb turns black as if burnt by fire, and afterward becomes corroded in one member and then throughout the body; thus cover it quickly, especially if this is caused by the sting of venomous creatures like scorpions or serpents, and if the corrosion reaches to the skull near the jawbone, cover that area without leaving any space for it to reach towards the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it reaches up to the hand, cover the joint with a bandage; and if it goes up the arm, wrap the cuff around; and if it passes the cuff, it is deadly, and no treatment can be made except by assessing its degree of severity; thus, act as corrosion appears or spreads: if it reaches the first joint, cover after the next joint; and if it spreads to the limb, wrap the entire limb; and if it rises up the leg, bandage at the knee joint; and if it is above the knee, there is no other remedy than a tourniquet for the patient soon dying; the method of using a tourniquet or sash causes one to bind on either side with ties extended some distance apart, so wide that when the bone is exposed, then bandage or wrap each side with a linen strip, ensuring it doesn't touch the healthy part, lest other injuries and abscesses occur.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 If during the procedure bleeding occurs, promptly cauterize the wound or apply binding powders; then return to your medicine until completed, then bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage and treat it until healed; I will tell you what happened to one person: a blackening appeared as if from fire on his right knee joint, spreading throughout the entire knee; when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his knee with cloth, and recovered. Later on, the corrosion reappeared in the wrist of the same hand, came to me, and after treating it with impactful remedies following body cleansing, I could not stop the corrosions; I wrapped his hand again because I had hope that the treatment would work; also doubted whether if I amputated his hand he wouldn't die, as the person’s strength was weakened. He lost all will and returned to his homeland, covered his hand with a cloth, and recovered.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Never comes an abscess in its place of origin, and it lingers so long that it forms a large collection of pus; then they heal over and break open, causing the pus to flow, and the eyelids remain swollen like lambs; the skin above is as subtle as cut silk, not reaching all the way to the bone or nerve, thus these illnesses are called "healed," but not "fistula"; however, if it becomes so elongated that it reaches the bone fully, then it's called a "faster." And when the skin is pulled off entirely, just like with cut silk.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If you believe that the skin is hardened and not completely rotten, and if the skin is full of charred flesh, then perform an enema in this way: check whether the cheeks are large, and whether the armpit which is there has a foul-smelling odor; then administer the Egyptian medicine thus prepared: take ease, oil, and litargire, equally, and put to cook them all in a vessel over fire until the medicines become as red and thick as honey; then take it according to your need, mix with water and hebon, and enema into the cheeks, squeezing out fluid; let the medicine remain inside for two hours, then strain it by pressing. Do this many times until the cheeks are fully rejuvenated and no pus remains; never use an enema of water from ashes when this Egyptian medicine is not prescribed, instead gather ash from grapevine wood, pour water over it, stir together, and enema until you know that the cheeks have been thoroughly cleaned; if the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes, then use an enema of water mixed with honey or a bit of litargire, or clisterize with honey and meadow wine so the mellowing properties of honey purify and cleanse, while the effects of the wine induce sweating; after doing this, if you are certain that the cheeks have been properly cleansed, then use an enema to bring out flesh in them using a lute-shaped instrument infused with emplastre or Egyptian ointment.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bow is in fullness, do not let it be strained by charms; and if you cannot cover the breast without looking as you wish, prepare it in such a manner that the bow moves to its lowest point where it is, because when the bow is in fullness, do not allow it to be strained with charms and if you cannot cover the breast without looking as you wish, prepare it: so that the bow moves lightly downward, and nothing hinders the bow; and take consolidating medicines to place under the wound, and stretch over a linen cloth that covers the whole ward; then patch up the forces of the opening on the breast slightly wider than the first, since apply ointment soothing under another cloth according to the quantity of the tear, and put it under the tear on the wound to ease the bow, and do not remove the large cloth for more than a day once; and whoever is over the opening on the breast, often removes it to take out the bow, and knows what flows from the bow, whether it's venom or little or quite much, or digestive, or indigesteboys. Take care if the patient feels pain or swelling, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in such a manner that you see its nature over the opening on the breast, know that the breast heals no more, and approaches health; then release it in the morning or the third day, and when you uncover the wound, change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the milk becomes indigestible after many days, understand that the breast does not produce any more.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle corruption comes after long time, do not despair of health, for healing is nearing.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are men whose bodies waste due to char in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; if an indigestible swelling occurs within the breast after many days, believe that the breast does not heal at all; and if the breasts take a long time to recover, and they become protruded, then prepare medicines dried in moist substance yet dry in virtue, like finished ointment; for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take diaphoretics ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the essence of old wine equal in substance; then concoct and use it; similarly, do more with cooked honey thickened, when diaphoretic ointments are not present, or you take myrrh, aloe, and incense, and grind them, and make a powder on honey as it is stirred over the fire; then mix with cloth swaddling, and spread upon the breast, without using long-laste aristolochia (birthwort) or celestial lily roots, which are like flour of wheat and barley; and use either simple or compound remedj: grind them, make a powder, mix with honey as said before, and use it; if the cure is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment, then understand that corruption has spread entirely, and exerts pressure on the bone, hard limbs or joints, or ligaments; thus apply the fistula treatment, as we have previously described.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	et:n; to la m. Do not.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A boil is an abscess that arises from under the nail of a finger or toe, or sometimes occurs in other parts; and when it comes to maturity, and no precaution is taken, thus it becomes an infected wound, which swells and suppurates until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance corrodes all the way through; and inflammation spreads up to the bone, causing pain until it does, and the head of the toe or finger is wide, and its color becomes dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 If you treat it as we have said in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, then one must cut off the entire excess tissue from under the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The caustic is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound; and if the nail precedes hardening of the skin, and it begins to throb, and blisters form, then you should place the spoon underneath the nail so that no blood escapes, push upward, and carefully extract the subtle fluid beforehand, and apply medicines with burning and corrosive properties to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, scrape and drill it, because as long as the bone becomes corrupted to that extent, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint being eaten away, follow this procedure as previously mentioned, then cure until it is healthy again; and if it's inflamed and infected with pus, first relieve pain; then scrape out the nail tip by cutting at an angle from underneasterly.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain spreads throughout the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocated shoulder that occurs in some men by chance is all flesh, and sometimes it has bone, and at other times there are fragments of bone, but none grow from the root of the joint where growth occurs on the shoulders.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one who occurs in the shoulder does not move, and the one that arises at the joint of the shoulder may occasionally move; the stature of those with flesh is lighter, roughly: trimming it from a wide base.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of a joint are very difficult to treat: hold them with both hands.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who arises or is in our next, it must be that you first remove the flesh down to the bone, then cut the bnail with an appropriately long string, and then treat it until it heals cleanly.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	lesse of the est prucht that m lik le benesli et la pe's in t gin they ne ce quenassus;l... icint to them.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to treat that swelling, ensure they are repositioned according to their natural shapes; then place between two sheets or cloths soaked in oil of roses, making sure they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of fine parchment until the joint is soldered as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	lessti sont all; s. oug said so far: CII80 t par lk le do they he ne bon, and them to-d o s f the bavazmeds et le t c unt ; Flexte; que Ie as i est the main.
des vils	 If you have a painful condition known
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are large swellings that encompass excessive melancholic fluids and occur in various body members; they more often happen to the legs of those who walk on foot and work or carry heavy loads compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then to administer him once a purging of colic, and then strengthen the veins in the groin area.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment with iron occurs in two ways: one is to treat the swelling and drain the black blood; the other method involves lifting the vein and draining it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The body lies as described in this manner: raise the first leg with hot water strong enough to make it subtle, then stretch the leg above the hip down to the area below the knee; then cut the vein at one place, either once, twice or thrice, making a wide incision, and then extract and bleed the black blood into your hand from head to toe as long as the virtue of the patient can tolerate it; and then tie off (ligature) and instruct him to dye with black meats. Then resume evacuation and healing when the veins are clear, being careful not to harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The procedure for the limb is as follows: raise the affected leg, if there's a lot of hair, then give it a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins become swoleblack; and if you don’t have a bath, heat it by fire, and then cut the long vein from head to knee or at any other place below the ankle; then treat the skin with each side, as long as it feels when touched; and it appears red and black, and once inside the skin it seems like a white rope. Then insert the thread underneath until it is raised above the skin, then bind gently to another notch at about three fingers apart; then treat the skin over the vein until you feel it, as done before, and bind to another notch in the same way as before; then cut another incision, or more if necessary, then tie up, and then release. After that, place a bandage on the leg from the first to the second notch; then release all the blood until empty, and then repeat the process at the ankle joint until the next incision is reached; then remove in sections until completely removed, then seal it with cotton wool or other material. If you can't drain and lift the blood, use a sharp needle on double thread to stitch up, tie off, and repeat at regular intervals as before; and be careful not to puncture, because if you do, you won’t be able to draw out and lift it, which will cause harm. When all is drained, place clean cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site, and care for it until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 If the sinew is twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it obliquely but do not sew it up; and treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron used to sew a tendon is curved, and should not cut through but rather cope the vein; and it has large curvature because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein, so be thick as we have said. Here's its shape:
de la voinne civile	 Of a civilian vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is found in legs, warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry land with no moisture; sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, as a result of swelling that comes from under the skin like what occurs internally with serpents and worms lodged between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it comes in the leg as a very great inflammebtion, then its heat changes to cold, and begins the vein to flow outwards, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head is open, you must wrap around a piece of linen 1 and a half to 2 feet in length on it, along with nails, leaving the linen attached to the leg, and every time there's no longering, then wrap around the linen, and the skin; and if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the remainder, not covering it at its root until fully out, because if you cover it, it will enter into the bone, bringing about an abscess and pus or infection therein, and a bad disease; therefore, this vein must be treated little by little to completion, leaving nothing or remnants; and there is never any bleeding when this vein is treated with 5 or 10 hands' length, or one man came to me whose it had come out at a distance of 10 hands long, and when you cover it, he pours in five arrows or spears, and pierces all the way through, so that everything flows out; and remove the material inside, cleaning up with medicines for pus every day, then treat as one would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And at no time through this vein hands bleed, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or ankle, and there is much torsion, and which flows heavily; then treat as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 From worms that grow between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called in our land "ox sickness" because it often occurs in the bile and consists of small worms that grow between skin and flesh, moving up and down throughout the body causing pain as they traverse the skin, sometimes forcefully; and are associated with decay from various bodily fluids, such as those seen in serpents, earthworms, and roundworms or intestines. Doubt arises regarding its nature, for when it travels through the body, it often ascends to the head, reaching the eye, sometimes reentering randomly, and destroying it; this occurs many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it to be drained and wound, one cannot force it unless it moves: therefore, it is necessary that you hold the joint above and below with a strong ligament tightly, then wrap around and draw out the foreign body, and if it seems to have penetrated deeply into the flesh, cauterize with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it causes is that it may run in oil as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye, firmly pull down the eyebrow, then wrap around, and draw out the foreign body; and one must use purifying medicines for dispersing corporeal humors, and wash with putrefying meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 from the pain arising from woundiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called 'vakir' in our land and causes pain in certain limbs, which then moves from one member to another; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to see an ill woman and found her with swollen arms, and a small inflammation in the vein of her arm; shortly afterward, I saw it rise like a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything else, similar to live silver when cut from one place to another; the pain moved away from that location, embedding into the shoulder, then spread throughout the body until reaching the other arm. Then she told me how it would return around her body as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how it moved from member to member, for I had never before experienced this illness in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 However, I want to maintain that anyone wishing to move pain from one place to another may do so, but I have not seen it done as in the woman; and I thought it was because women have dry bodies, with exposed veins, and thus appeared this constrained swelling; and not according to this reason are those who are illustrious, and have moist bodies and re-covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain if it opens up as we have said, quickly apply pressure above and below hastily, and then bandage until the constrained swelling subsides; and cauterize the wound; and if you do not see it with your eyes, treat as those who reduce flatulence, like foul pills and serapias seeds, and other similar things.
des saiettes	 Of arrow extractions
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrowheads are of various kinds, depending on their appearances and where they come from in the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The diversity of their arrows is such that there are some with large points, and small ones, feathered, or fletched; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those which have pieces; and the one that lodges in any limb does so in a particular way: either as principal members like the brain, liver, heart, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it lodges in any part of these limbs then the sign of death that I will tell you hereafter becomes evident: if it is necessary to consider extracting this arrowhead, for death approaches in various ways; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, treat and dress the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when the arrow enters and pierces the bone is a swollen forehead that is reddened, stiffened, strained, and flushed with color; also inflammamoin and flushing of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile; and sometimes without force in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and there is a wound from moisture that appears as white hair, and spreading like burnt charcoal; and if this sign becomes apparent to you, then proceed with treatment, and extract the arrow if it has not come out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it enters or leaves is that it seems to be near the left wrist, and feels as if it were inserted into something hard, not hollow; and sometimes the arrow moves like hairs, and there are black veins coming out, along with chills and cold sweat, and fainting: then you feel doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of arrow shafts is that the patient's forehead has no foam at the wound site, and their throat swells, and the ill person changes complexion, and they gasp loudly and crave cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	: the
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	When an arrow falls or from the belly, perhaps it leaves behind no trace of indigestible flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrow falls into the belly and there is no exit through the intestines, then there is no hope in treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the arrow falls into the bladder and the urine stops flowing while coming out feverishly, and the patient feels intense pain: believe that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	Other limbs, depending on the face and neck and throat and shoulder and hip and spine and loins and thighs, and all resembling limbs are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to certain men that an arrow struck the first joint near the nose root; I tried it, and pierced from another side through the ear fat, and was almost sound without exception.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pierced another joint where an arrow entered through the eye fat near the paper below it, and the arrow was protruded outwards, reaching only the tip towards its shaft, being large like a Turkish bow without ears; the joint remained sound, with no unexpected occurrences.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pierced an arrow to the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabic arrow with ears: I removed its fletchings and subtly guided it until I pierced, leaving the Christian sound.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And a man struck by an arrow at his abdomen, believing he would die; and even after thirty days had passed, there was no change in his condition; I cut near the arrow, repositioned it, removed it completely, and nothing adverse occurred.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And for the man on whom an arrow fell on his back and the wound was swelled above it; he remained with the arrow inside him without any change in his natural disposition or harm to any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And for another man to whom an arrow fell on his face and the wound was swelled; he suffered great pain in this manner and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And I treated a man of the king's council, in whom an arrow was lodged between his shoulders and he slightly leaned to the right; and the arrow was fully repositioned after being with him for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 It had been carefully concealed, and I could not feel it; but it caused twitching and pain from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the tip of an arrowhead. I placed the poultice on top, as a digestive remedy because his eyes were not swollen; and it seemed to me that I could see the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I kept the poultice on for days and allowed the wound to heal from within, until the patient felt the arrowhead in his brain; and he told it to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied a corrosive anti-infection poultice to the wound until it healed completely and tried it out; then placed another such poultice on the opening of the wound so that the head of the arrowhead became visible to me, and thoroughly permeated around it for four months; after which I applied a remedy causing the skin at both sides to shrink, but could not remove it. Then I ceased with subtle manipulations and devised clever ways to extract it until one day, using tongs that were skillfully fashioned in accordance with this chapter's guidance, I extracted the wound entirely.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the masters judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; it will be reset immediately, and the wound is bandaged, and the patient becomes entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 And I have told you the quality of arrow extraction; focus your care on what I do not mention here, for the book cannot cover everything; but wise masters discuss little about much and much that is present and failing, work with nine tools, and use nine instruments for dealing with strange matters in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows lodged in limbs are of two types: those that enter at the spot or from another direction; and if an arrow enters where it is lodged, it is a penetrating shaft entering into flesh, and never comes out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not burst now, let it remain so long as the joint is swollen around, and be drained; likewise if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it for several days, moving slightly each day; then it will burst, and if it does not burst, puncture all around a very fine hole until the cavity is widened, and then extract.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the skull, reaching almost to one side of the brain's ventricles, and subjecting the patient to some of the accidents I have previously mentioned: do not extract it, but let it remain until it becomes equal after several days because if it reaches the jugular vein, it is deadly.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not stuck into the bone alone and does not reach an abscess, and the patient remains without pain for some days, then proceed with lancing.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very swollen and cannot be removed thus, then administer ointments around it as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals cleanly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is reset in the body but cannot be seen, encase it entirely; and if you feel it, treat with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the widening of the wound or depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then extract as much as possible when the wound is large; and remove the arrow if you can touch it, and if it has ears where it holds, cut off any parts that are stuck out on both sides that you can grasp, and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can more easily draw them out; but be careful not to break the arrow while extracting.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, let the vein reach its limits before pulling, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 If the bleeding occurs contrary to our instructions, follow the treatment as described in this chapter; and be careful not to incise nerves or veins, and extract arrows with a technique that avoids danger, quickly or slowly, gently or clearly; position the patient according to how they were when the arrow fell into them, for it is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, do so as signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 For an arrow that comes from another direction or has pierced nothing of them, or the skin is swollen in any place visible or palpable: then cut above it, as far as the pincers can grasp, and then extract; if it jumps out forcefully now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	cust that prud:
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 If it cannot be removed, leave it for now and resume extraction as soon as possible until fully extracted; if the arrowhead is still in there, put oil on everything; if part of the shaft has been cut off, provide immediate care using appropriate tools so that the tip of the arrow enters into the tool's groove; then apply force, and if the arrowhead protrudes, insert the instrument with its point, to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is contaminated, it's necessary to remove all flesh around where the poison resides if possible, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrowhead pierces or injures the belly or bladder or ribs and is close by, you must cut around it if possible, then extract it if necessary; be careful not to cut the vein and nerve while doing so, then remove it, and dress the wound as needed; care for it until healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to manage it: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow shafts.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the arrowhead is also like that of a bird's feather to point at the tip of the arrowhead, as described here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	With tongs for pushing and pulling as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of common veins in the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The nerves that we know are XXXI in number, of which there are sixteen heads, as follows: Two hammer-shaped ones behind the ears, called "ear herbs"; and two arteries visible on each temple; and two veins within both eyes, known as "aspirers"; and one vein in the middle of the forehead; and one vein atop the nose bridge; and the two vagus nerves that are located in the neck collarbone area; and the two facial nerves found above each lip near the mouth, which are called "augensickle"; and two cranial nerves below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins which are commonly bled in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and they call them among laymen "vein of the head"; and the other is called 'fast', composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call them among laymen "vein of the body"; and the basilic is also on the right side, and they call it among laymen "vein of the belly", and it lies under the cubital fossa, and that is the vein from which one bleeds, clearly visible above the elbow pit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the saphenous vein is the one between the little finger and ring finger, with two branches; in the leg where the foot lies, there are three veins: the first is above the cubital pit on the left side, and the second saphene which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called 'saphene', located in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are also three veins above those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The source of the earaches that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines; and the quality of the ointment, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient, and rub their skin where the ears are on a coarse cloth; then tighten the neck of the patient with a band, until the two earlobes appear behind the ears at different heights: attach them firmly to your thumb, and wherever you feel hairs sprouting from beneath your thumb, hold fast; then take the lancet, and direct it into the vein below the ear down to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein, and puncture it well enough so blood can flow out until you see it; then tighten and tie, until it is cleaned. I have already mentioned incisions and cautery as described in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The vein of the two arteries that are in both temples should be treated by an ancient method known as emigrainne sodo and obtalmie acostumee, and tears from the eyes; the quality of this treatment is such that I have described: and it requires the patient to raise their head so that the veins appear openly; they feel pain in the backs of their hands, then bite down on something for relief, then lift the root of the nose upwards towards the index finger, and insert the lancet below, then draw out the blood from above, following as you have done with other veins, and bleed according to your judgment; then leave the patient lying down, place their head on cotton after an hour, then bandage firmly, leaving it until healed; we have explained in detail about their coping mechanism and extraction, or where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The drainage of the vein on the forehead is as valuable for diseases of old headaches and migraines and redness, and its quality is such that patients strain their necks by twisting until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fossoir," which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And insert the tip over the vein, and hold it with your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow out in quantity as you see; then release the patient's neck and tie the vein so that it is clean and free of any broad flame-like markings.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary for the folds to be too tight; and avoid being twisted, as the bone may protrude, and there's a chance of breaking the veins when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The drainage of veins in the eyelids helps with eye conditions, redness, and facial diseases; its quality is such that patients strain their necks by twisting without ties as before; then perform the incision through the bridge, just a bit long and wide enough for slight movement, because there are no charms.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	, and let him deteres lor poilz cest cholee esproveit est to let sait isi unt, pour tout li couvide de bif menut a tet: est douce la car il est de his qui avent le fx. And soie of les prist est ce dit onement beausir, et le d l’on les chole esprenest, en ekin and par isle de.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The lymph of the vein from the neck is as hot as ague and sciatica, and headache that comes on the face, and especially when it is longstanding; and its quality is such that the patient grips his collar, then strains his neck to your left hand, and takes a subtle, long breath, inserting it between the two nostrils as much as possible because the vein does not open well on its own, and the blood will begin to flow; do not allow it to flow too profusely and control the bleeding according to necessity, then tie it off for one night, as it is quickly restored; this is the form of the thread.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The strength of the two guyots assists in stretching the alaine, at the beginning of bleeding, and many diseases, and scabs, and corrosions, and herpes, and eruptions; and the quality of the strength is such that the patient removes his collar from both sides, as we have said; and be seated with the master over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on I seat, then cleanses the vein widely for a short distance, then treats the blood promptly, or as much as necessary; then repeats in the other vein, then removes the ligature, and strains out all the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; and leaves it until morning when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of liver disease
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of vein lips above assists in coagulation within the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits of lips, and ulcers and abscesses.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The quality of liver disease is to make the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be identified by their blackness and small black vessels around them. Thus, grasp both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, grasp the largest ones from each side, and similarly treat all the veins above and below, for they are made in a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 due to liver disease beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The veins that are beneath the tongue aid after cephalic disease and is by extending the throat, and diseases of the eye, and mouth diseases; the quality of this veinage is to have the patient seated in front of you with their hands between them and the sun, lift the tongue, and look under each side for a black vein: thus purify both, but do not prick too deeply, as these are arteries beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins which are commonly bled by the method: either being pierced through all along with wide incisions, or fine slices as sharp knives, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and extension of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the leather strap is very well-known, and it's wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open veins with plain bleeding of abundant visible blood and containing much thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of fine olive incisions.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle pointed, and for collecting subtle veins, or where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are from above the throat, and neck, and groin, and abdomen; so it must be for the leech to bite deeply and adequately, and cleanse itself of the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 If it cuts the artery and blood flow starts, if bandaging is necessary as I have said; the wound should not be pinched but carefully sliced like a furrow.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the vein is not clearly visible, you must extract it and use another one; or if you want to insert no stitch in it, or locate its opening near the arm itself: it is clearly visible; and cut along the wound as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you wish to know the location of the vein, it is necessary that you extract the arm and touch the spot as long as you can feel the hairs; then sign the spot with a marking, then tie the arm, and cut along the vein carefully, avoiding the artery when you see it swelling, for it's an artery: therefore beware.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you see it protrude upward like a child's urine, and the veins are red and delicate, know that it is from an artery: act quickly then, place your forefinger along its length, then remove your finger if possible; this often happens; so leave the arm, let it be, do not move until healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not healed and it swells up, and the medication has not been prescribed, cut the artery if it opens; for the head of the wound retracts, and it becomes infected.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a slice of fistula, and split it, and take one half and place it until the next day; if the veins do not reconnect, that is good; if not, then treat with powders that stop bleeding; and the constrictions are not always grizzled in various dispositions for the small location of the wound, and strength to the affected arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The blood flow of the vein is hindered so it cannot heal properly on its own, and because it consists of the basilica and cerebral components as we have mentioned; hence the leech must be warmed to loosen the nerve that lies underneath, and if it sticks too much, then it pierces the nerve, causing swelling and pain in the surrounding tissues, sometimes unable to heal; this particular nerve is often punctured many times, and if it doesn't work on any individuals due to its subtlety, you must heat the instrument slightly; carefully move the nerve at your discretion.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is tension between the two nerves, they cause great pain.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The leech of the cerebral region is effective in drawing blood from the head and aids the eyes; it must be handled with care when pinching at the olive flake or myrtle flake, for these are the safest veins as they lack any nerves or arteries beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 However, it is necessary to choose the lightest place for resetting, and not strain anything if done for the first time, then start again; and sometimes there may be swelling in some men after the initial attempt, but do not strain them.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about healing is that it is not only undertaken to maintain health and avoid future diseases; it should be done in one of the three ways known as head (cephalic), fasting, and basilic. And healing should begin with prayers at dawn, and in autumn and winter after eating when signs of fullness appear; and healing should occur on the first day or third, after two or three hours have passed.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The treatment of diseases does not have a fixed time but should be done when needed during the day or night, at all hours and times; and it is not necessary to treat children up to fourteen years old, nor women carrying a child in their seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should you heal the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 If one wishes to treat themselves in any way at all, it is necessary to cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much feces retained and so that unwanted substances do not harm the main body parts; also do not treat those who are too weak from food or liquor unless absolutely necessary. If one has been vomiting after an attack of colic, diarrhea, frequent bowel movements in women, excessive urination in both men and women, wakefulness, sexual activity, and any other factors that affect the entire body, either through physical injuries or weapons; then carefully regulate the humors. If you have significant weight from food, drinks, and medicines, avoid them if possible; otherwise take a bath unless something prevents it to help purify the blood, and cleanse the vein in front of the ear as we have said; and on that day abstain from work, stress, lustful activities, and similar things. Be moderate with healers who treat you more than those treated by others, and rub your arms twice or three times, then gently remove any bandages after a short time because if it is too tight or loose, it cannot be done correctly; then rub the chest until the veins are swoln and feel them. Then, apply some old oil to the healer's fingertips with your left hand over that area of the vein you wish to treat so that the vein does not stick and tear when punctured.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that flee like strings in a harp, and some of which are swollen with windwiseness; thus when they are placed over fire, they retract to the flame, and cannot open the vein, resulting in such cases; and if it works the vein, the wound is too narrow, hence one must be knowledgeable about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; if not, restart even further below that level where eagerly it was set, unless the bone is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the bone is swollen and the patient's hope wanes, let them rest for a day or two without binding the arm: perhaps abscesses will form underneath; do not bathe it yet, then resume healing if they desire to continue; and if the hole is small, or subtly hidden beneath the skin so that you doubt whether much blood seeps as seen, apply fire directly there too; handle the wound carefully but promptly so the bone swells; this often happens when the injury is minor.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not commence treatment again with the lye, and apply a bit of olive oil there, for it relieves the pain in the body and softens this spot where the lye is applied; and thus manage the application of olive oil to each vein that you treat, in order to constrict the blood flow; and similarly, do thrice and bow with it when placed over the joint; so subtly does it move and spreads if it becomes too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there comes a large abscess often, especially when the opening of the vein is small at that time, and you hurry to place a moistened sponge in warm water and salt, and keep it strained for an hour; then make this after the blood has drained from the vein, and if there remains on the joint after several days any blackness or greenish color, do not mind it; and if you see anything of aloes or myrrh remixed with chamomile juice, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance of infection occur on the lower part of the spine; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find a soft spot under pressure from your hand, then that is a sign of illness.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not place anything as we have mentioned on it, for there may be a risk to the artery; but apply a dry plaster first to harden the area, then treat with another remedy until healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And address each wound according to its severity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see a large one, let it drain until it becomes subtle; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And one must for those who are swollen and raw, and need blood extraction, make a wider wound and wide scabs; and for the weak ones do the opposite, sustain them little and often, and they should be nourished by cutting across rather than grabbing hold; and this manner of healing prevents excessive bleeding and swelling of nerves, and it is better to have slow and narrow movements.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 And for those whose body needs nourishment, one should give soaked bread in pomegranate juice; if they are exhausted, offer it three or four times a day. If they have a cold constitution, consume moistened bread before the treatment with syrup mixed with aromatic honey and spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If it palms at the sinew, after much blood is released, then he should inhale a gruel of charcoal and fragrant syrup, and use other remedues as we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bandage the arms and dress them again another time, it is necessary when greatly weakened by excessive moisture, that they should be dried slowly in accordance with the quantity of their virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	by; they can, and, such as s (concquest in the tt.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	When you wish to heal another part, it should be healed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body that has become overheated, causing fever; therefore, one must bleed a large quantity and widen the vein until it spurts like blood from the pores; then heal all sinew conditions and place your hand on his hair as they grow, ensuring death does not occur at the site of pore-bleeding, which happens often when patients are neglectful; bleeding should not be repeated if you see the arm dislocate, nor allow blood to issue a second time if the vein is closed, but press firmly above it; and if corpse-like, stretch out the arm quickly as this would be detrimental, rather let it grow until he bled a second time; or hold at the point of faintness until the blood from the cranial vessel ceases to flow freely and apply some water in small amounts near it, then gently press.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, let it bleed freely without constriction, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to bleed the blood a second time, from there at the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is healed at the place of the wound near the head because it is composed thusly.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The manner of the sanitation is such that the patient places his hand in hot water until the fingers are red; then it should be bandaged tightly so the vein appears well, and now suture across without being too wide or long; the punctures should be wide enough, and placed close to the joint of the hand, ensuring nothing leaks out. If done, reheat the hand in hot water and let blood flow into it until there is enough; if this occurs frequently, do not avoid heating the hand again as it's more common in winter than summer; the sanitation from this vein is safer than all others, with no arteries or nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The vein of the palm of the right hand is useful for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done: stretch the hand, and apply hot water until the veins are emptied, if you can see them; and if the vein runs across the whole palm, and you cover it entirely without hurting anything, then don't go too deep because the nerves are very close to the skin, and afterwards put the hand in warm water again, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and honey to the veins quickly for rapid healing, and do so for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The liniment of the hand in the left should be used for scrofula disease, and do as I have told you with the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The vein of the elbow is useful for all diseases that arise from under the body, such as hip illnesses, and retention of urine, and kidney disease, and old ailments of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient should place some hot water in a pitcher, and rub it on the vein until it turns red, and apply something warm over the joint near the foot; then put the pitcher at or above the ankle area, where there are many streams; therefore cleanse with water wider than the stream or at the ankle, so as to move freely.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cleanse the foot beneath, watch for veins that surface, and cleanse deeply as with a scraper; let the flesh adhere again.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the vein cannot be drawn out, reset the foot in water, and allow it to fully drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the physician fails on the first attempt, start again just above a little, because it is swollen; do not hesitate to touch the nerve, as we have said, and then apply balm to the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The source of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its severing alleviates hip pain when it is due to heat in blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient should stand in water up to the ankle area and stretch over two fingers while twisting, for otherwise it will not open the vein; if opened, then cleanse thoroughly in all ways you can, even diagonally; therefore move as much as possible when grasping, because the leg is swoln, and it is quite reposed at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 If you cannot reduce it, take any bandage that wraps around the head or back of the foot, and toward the little toe, and protect the nerves; then press down on the blood until you see enough, and then release the ligament, and place cotton underneath, now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 Buboes from plague sores
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made from horns or glass or ivory; and suction is performed in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cupping which does not hurt like fire is done in two ways: one with very hot heat and the other without heat; and cupping that is made by pricking and bleeding is placed on 14 parts of the body, so all are at the top; some are in the neck area; others on both sides of the collarbone; and under the chin; and the armpits; and over the shoulders; and above the hips; and along both arms; and both legs; and both ankles. The cupping does not involve much blood, but only tiny venous spots scattered in the flesh, so no one suffers as with vein opening, just like with cupping of veins; and it must neither be heated nor warmed for any disease caused by excesses until all parts of the body are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if for the necessity of illnesses it is required to vomit, or by customs, we administer each remedy at the beginning and end of the month, and every day; for there are some who, when they need to vomit, have a heavy headache; and those who experience congestion and redness in their face, head, and neck, with dimmed vision; and such who encounter drops of blood in their mouth, swelling tongue, and spitting blood; and there are those who think, see through bloodshot eyes, and feel weakened and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to blow after III hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The remedy for the head is helpful in easing pain ... which they experience, and it should only be after evacuating everything from their body; this vomiting treatment is related to the cure of the cephalic region, and one should not use it if they are naturally cold or have catarrh, as it causes them great harm; thus, night watchmen or those with cold head ailments should not use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who become weak and feeble, and it is wise to place the arthritis painfulness with grippe, and they suffer from fever.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventilation in the neck is at the level of the brain and the basilica, and thus it extends to the lengthening of the body, and the splitting of the channel of the pormon, and all others, and replenishment; and little pressure should be applied, as if held too firmly, it may cause obstructions or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Ventilation of the ribs in the neck if it causes headaches, otitis and migraines, as well as strangulation, pain at the roots of the teeth, and is at the level of brain; command the nurse to express his hand when placing, so he does not cut the artery or veins.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The inflammations from under the chin are caused by oral disease, and decay of gums, and various diseases that occur in the mouth; and they are in the places of the blood vessels of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation in the shoulders is caused by an illness that arises from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The inflammation of the elbows is equivalent to that of III veins in the arm, as it draws blood from these large veins; and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is very tender, and contains vessels and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup located on the croup is like hemorrhoids at the foundation, and diseases below, it must be large and made of wool that needs to be well milked; and sometimes, if it were too fine, it would break; causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups drain openly because they draw blood from the entire body, and are like ancient pains of the kidneys, and bladder, and stones; they reset the months and ankles, and always weaken the body after long use, bringing paralysis in various dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the suction cup is that you place it first empty and quickly draw out, then put on firmly, and move evenly, without stopping until you see the red and swolereness of the skin, and appear the dull color of blood; then remove, and pay attention to the body's condition because there are those who have a sore chin, and clear pores: it is sufficient to puncture once only, but make large and somewhat deep cuts; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	When the vein is large, it must be struck twice: the first time to finesse the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thin, it must be struck a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood bit by bit, we do so only once at most.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we desire much blood, let us often repeat the procedure; and if the flesh is spongy, cut deeply, and finish in such a way that the vessels are quickly pierced, and for those with thick and hard skin and who have been troubled before, apply oil to the elbows of soothing and dissolving ointments: if it is violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is vegetable, cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm resin, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the one whose joint you are strengthening with a taut and wide cord does not need oil to be applied, but rather it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or blackthorn berry water, or squash gourd water, or porcelain pitcher water, or other similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much sweat should rise easily, or lime water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or blackthorn berry water, or anet leaf or camomile infusion, or other similar substances; and they must not be ventilated before the bath or while in the bath, but one to two hours after the bath; and they should not sleep after ventilation, as it is necessary that they sweat when ventilated and when inflamed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And those who are sick with colic and have too much heat and inflammation should consume cooling things such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce for ease, similar items; and fresh jujube pits, donkey milk cheese, and wet meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And those with cold complexions should consume syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, a little juice, fresh jujube pits, small birds, and ducks; each day they breathe deeply, they must drink more than eat; it is appropriate to give some individuals triaicle or muscat before or after ventosation to comfort the main limbs; but their heat should be subtle, only those who are hot may consume it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The suction cups that are placed without causing pain are those applied to the liver, and spleen, and gout, and abdomen, buttocks, legs, and hips, because these parts do not tolerate being punctured anywhere, and it is only done to draw blood from one part of the body to another, as we place them on lymph nodes when they are swolpressions; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply suction cups to the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the limb; and alleviate pain, when there is obstruction or stones, so it may draw out the obstruction by its attractive property by chance, or remove the stone from its place; thus it works when placed on the liver and spleen when viscosity is retained, and these suction cups are prepared empty to be filled as needed; they are never prepared all at once with fire, nor sometimes plain water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or water heated by boiling herbs suitable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should have a width of two palms and a half at the front, and have around its edge a small hole, like for pushing in a needle, and be made of glass or metal, so that it does not slip on the patient when placed on the limb; and there should be another handle of transverse reed or iron to hold a candle while using it, and they come in large and small sizes according to the diseases and condition of those who use them, for children's blisters are different from adults', and thin ones from fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this is how you should apply the blister: take a candle of wax or grease and place it in the middle of the handle which is also in the middle of the blister, so that when lit, the flame does not burn the patient at the bottom of the blaster; then place it on the limb, with the handles as described earlier, and wait for the steam to come out before removing the blister. Take the grease again as mentioned before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the blister which is used for pleurisy at all times, there are no tube or valve, and it is prepared only when full of water, and is placed on the limb with great care; and this is how it looks.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Blisters are prepared only for limbs where you cannot place blisters due to their small size, such as lips and gums, or similar areas; and in clean, bald wounds like pus-filled sores, take them if they contain clear, soft waters without impur grogs. Then immerse the blisters in a gentle warm water until full, ensuring nothing is inside their openings. Next, drain the blisters of blood and apply another blister; then rub the limb until it becomes red, place the new blister on top; when they are full and firm, if you can put a blister there, do so because this is very useful later.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If this does not work, then raise the limb with ease, and then bathe it in abundance of water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the veins swell too much after cutting them away from the body without stitches, moisten a linen cloth in cold fresh water, and place over, until the wounds are closed; and if there are multiple wounds, apply crushed glass or scabs, among other things, until they close; or you put on the limb half of peeled beans, and let them stay until they dry to the bone, thus sealing now; and if more is needed, take additional stitches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the wounds do not take to closing, rub fresh blood on it and insert a needle until bleeding stops, then place over, and as soon as they feel the blood, dry them; and when you see that they heal, powder with a little aloe and sage broth, or ash, so they will close now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and provide restoration from fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Know this, dear son of a bitch, that the foolish wise man delves into this treatise, which he has never seen in any ancient books nor read letters about; and for this reason, the science is alien to our land, because I have never found any good ones; and I know nothing, unless through the wisdom of ancient books, or from having studied so much that I have mastered its knowledge, and by experiment, and from the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this treatise what is contained herein, and abbreviated at the end, and shown clearly the forms of diseases that are mentioned, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in this book the essence of words and chapters where the sage places his understanding, and dwells on truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fractures or disloc cuisines, if it is necessary to support the patient on one side and another, unless nothing completely supports him as weakness of limbs, babies, or old men; or if the season is not very hot, or too cold; and consume chilled broths, that is, cold soups, fish stew, and do not drink wine nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you no longer have doubt of a hot boil or leakage of matter in the limb; then the patient must return to his first state as he used to be.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote nourishment and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, barley, lamb's pancreas, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the nourishment mentioned contributes to quicker healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that broken bones from the old and decrepit cannot be well mended or joined according to their nature for limb strengthening, nor those who are too flexible, like children's bones; but pay no attention, realign with strong iron rings joining the member together until it is as strong as before; and do not leave all of your work undone, and therefore you must feed on hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	The fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of breaking bones.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that result from an upward force and others by pressure, just as the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, or a break along the entire small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each type has its own means and proper instruments for restoration, as memory suggests in the right place; and it is known to have broken bones when the eyes are twisted, widely opened but not far enough, and near the pressing point of the hand; and if there is no twisting or touching at the spot, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no breakage; however, it can still have a curvature, crack, or minor fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	by; butte and; the following an's ; siles mault that.  tad* cumbard; they aretractor; don's the de the ou let cequesteckze con ca; What. If, et sont.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fracture which occurs in rolling, with two parts separated, they must now be aligned equally so as abscesses may arise; and if abscesses occur, let them remain for no day until the abscess is eased; then make it equal to movement that you can easily and healthily do, knowing that the restoration of it is easier than those with missing pieces; then strain, as it should afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether main or foot, or to your hand if it's a small limb, or to two strings, or to one string and your hand; put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are dislodged, reset them by all means in their places with movements you can do, and ensure through your work no injury or pain comes upon the patient; and properly align the two ends of the bone in their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And the patient feels a sensation in the hand if it seems to you that he is not well: dress him properly, and do not bind or press too much, as those who cause abscesses with their work often result in heat and contraction of the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is at a standstill, properly restrain the patient so that it does not move, neither in wakefulness nor sleep, nor turning, or any other way; and ensure the limb is securely positioned so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when it feels no pain, it is not at a standstill, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain; also ensure it is set properly so that twists do not occur as it heals; the quality of the damaged limb will be according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	the t; That:t, so they cannot we's’re assuze at se uter s (I think they should be no longer the patient of the mid.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small members such as arms and legs: wrap them with soft fine linen; for larger ones like thighs and legs: use a wide and sturdy bandage, because the wide bandages encompass the entire large member equally so that no part is unsecured; then insert light padding III turns or IV depending on the size of the limb, and secure one hand with the whole bandage, then move to above the fracture and tighten less, as close to the fracture but slightly away from it; and gradually loosen the bandage a little at a time until you grasp a large portion of the healthy part, then take another bandage, and return directly to the injured area; then revisit the area below the fracture, and secure moderately, neither too tight nor too loose as we have previously stated in the first mention above; then place linen or cloth pads between the bandages until they are all equal, then finish with one layer of binding above them, and then apply well-made splints on top, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 If there is swelling or an abscess, apply a soothing ointment for the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days; then wash with moist compresses made from one-third of a broad leather thong soaked in water, or wood used to make grooves, or palm leaves, according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But it is necessary that the stitch placed over the break be slightly larger and wider than the others; and as long as needed for small or large injuries; then secure the sutures as you did with the first one, then above a thread promptly, just like in the first stitching atop the tear; tighter means less width; it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax linen; because if the thread is too thick as I have seen in works where men make their rope ends from twisted linen threads, it's a great mistake, for the stitch cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it must not have less than two finger spaces between each suture.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the shoulders of their arms after being strained to healthy places, then place poultices of flax or cotton rags so they do not itch.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound has been torn open and the keys are broken, I will now explain the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to strain all the damaged limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 When the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put them in splints unless after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the certainty of an abscess occurring; and here is the manner of ancient surgeons for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that stands against the walls of a mill, mix with plenty of water, creating this concoction which should not be too clear nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of splint used to restore broken limbs in various conditions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take abareis (abarotum), ladanum, aniseed, asphaltide, gum arabic, and myrrh - .x. Z.; aloes - .v. Z.; alechilengrae - .viij. Z.; make a powder of it, mix with egg white; if the patient's humour is hot, use this plaster as it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones in many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another method of splint for torsion: take myrrh and wormwood in the amount of 10 scruples; cassia and aloes in the amount of 9 drams; acacia in the amount of 6 drams, frankincense in the amount of 10 drams. Grind well, mix with water or plenty of whey, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to reset dislocated joints and their bones that have come out of place; it alleviates pain occurring, and the cutting using bone; breakage: take new linen, and milk in oil heated, and put on them at the site.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These plasters do not restore but are good to soothe a hot abscess and properly ease pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of treating bones that heal: take dried leaves of figs and leaves of the earthly pawl, grind them together to make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to reset the fracture of bone and soothe them remaining from an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour, each part; and grind it, and mix with wine, and if the member is swollen, then with water mixed from coriander leaves or just water, apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way to reset is more common than the first when an abscess comes due to member restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take root of vismalve, and seed of flax, balm, mallows, and celandine; and flowers of violets and chamomile, all together in equal parts. Then grind it up and mix with salt water or fresh water, or wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not apply anything more than a piece of wax and oil to the broken limb for healing, and it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen believes that on the broken limb for healing one should apply dry things a little warm like myrrh and aloe and incense and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat pain and swelling: take mugwort and devil's claw herbs, or feathers of birds, and wormwood, in equal amounts, grind them all together, and make an ointment from the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then loosen them a little afterward and be sure the patient feels no pain or has moved any bone from its place; if you have patience and do not rush to reset it, but carefully. If there is pain at the site, or itching, feeling of relief or swelling comes, then quickly loosen it again and remove the splint now; take a light bandage, a moist sponge in seawater, and dip it into water, and lift the limb until the itch subsides, and pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, and then apply dry cloths, wrung out with warm water or oil roseatum, and wrap around a nut (a gauze bandage), as long as you are sure of healing heat; and rest the inflammation in the limb, and alleviate pain, then resume gentle splinting again, but do not apply too much force as before.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that inflammation and redness and pain and swelling are present throughout the bone, and there is need of emollient powder and bandaging, as you did before similarly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 If it does not arise in the limb anything as we have said, do not reset until after III days or IIII or V or VII; and never leave more than XX days without checking its condition while healing continues, and approaching joint alignment above; then you should securely reset initially, and swell subsides with flesh growth, as I mentioned before; and if the site appears dried beyond necessary, know that scars will not form; thus moisten it with warm water every time you reset, once a day, and gently cleanse the area regularly. Through this method, scarring is prevented in the limb, restoring proper joint alignment like skilled surgeons do: anything else I see does not seem beneficial or correct.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 There are many ways of breaks and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made from a sword's percussion strike, where the shaft hits all the bone up to the joint which is below the bone, as with an axe or cudgel; hence this type of break is called "haichure.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword pierces the bone above, this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impacted fracture, crack, or bone chip from a stone fall, or other similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fracture, which extends just up to the tissue below the bone, or upon it, and this wound may be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that has been filled in with bone as fine as hairs, and it is a small fissure, hence this break is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by being struck by a stone or falling, or similar things, where part of the bone enters within, and the ends above are like when chandeliers tip over onto their candles; so between the fragments inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 This occurs more often in those who have wet bones, like children's skulls; and it happens in all these ways of fractures where small fragments are left loose as if they were such; and I will speak about them in their proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of fractures by the extraction near them, and the examination with tenting, and by the corruptible wound that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is known by what happens when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, then there are black cracks.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware if an unfortunate event happens to the patient, and if you see any bad signs such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding outwardly, and other similar conditions in various states, he cannot cure without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeless case, and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone before the fourteenth day that can be seen.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh above the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the fracture of the bone reaches close to the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part as such: and ensure that you remove the piece injured by the patient's malady, and expose the bone in all ways possible, and on top of the wound shape as much as you can; if there is bleeding when revealing the bone or pus, aid with what is appropriate, and it is that you fill the cavity with gauze soaked in olive oil; then let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be sure of the cessation of bleeding; then begin around the bard to remove, and this is done according to ways of surgery: one way is that you cut at a narrow space in front, which is its shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various thrusts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, with points, and made of iron; and in lighter work, do not hit the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is too hard and tough, it requires that you pierce around it, administer thrusts with needles, not too deep into the skull or on its tip, leaving a margin or circle so that the point does not pass through the bone; and you must have several of these, each coming to the surface of the bone as needed, having needles for all tests (examinations); this is the form of the three methods of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you know the bone has been pierced; then move the needle slightly to another spot, and do this throughout, then use scissors for the space in the b
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have the bone pierced and broken, it is proper to treat the preparedness that has been of the bone with any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more careful and subtle than the other chisels; and if there are no small bones or scales remaining, gently move them with small movements; then tend the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is what the Galenists say, which is more salty; and it should be applied strongly, as instructed.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone where the break moves openly; and once you have uncovered that part, place it under the head of this crescent-shaped incision instrument, which has the following shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut through it entirely, and the part is in two sides, so that the cutting tool is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet underneath, so you chip lightly around the entire bone without harming the covering, for if it's close to the bone, chipping should be gentle, as we do not want to damage or injure.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the cloth, and the bone is cut smoothly above, leaving small pieces, then you must address the roughness again, and remove scales with a subtle razor of which you should have various quantities in order to apply most conveniently in each place according to the treatment and figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have many razors, use coarser ones first, then finer ones, and continue in this manner until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other haircut and subtle fracture, you must treat it according to its readiness; this is something that cannot be easily replaced for someone who has put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the scab is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen bandage according to the quantity of the wound, and anoint with oil roseate, and place it upon the wound; then take another bandage folded in two or three layers, and anoint with wine and oil roseate, and place it over the first bandard. Do this as gently as possible so you do not burden the sinew, and administer above the other linen without excessively stretching it until only the wound is covered; leave in such state for one or two days until the swelling subsides, then remove it, and apply medicines as with root of lis, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things. From these things make a fine powder, and place upon the wound, and administer usual remedies without causing stinging; ensure that the wound remains clean, not allowing ointment or any swelling to accumulate, as when bow is gathered on the cervical bandage, it will tighten and restrict, leading to great harm because when you place something sharp upon the sinew, it binds.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore be cautious, if by chance something comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful and without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if darkness does not come due to the medicine applied, so that it may have its virtue, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil blended with woolen cloth, and apply it on the sore; then treat as necessary according to the remedies required until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	One says that the two parts above, or one upon the other, are not broken since they are bones; and that which lies beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break but only fold or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must sew a small hole or tear on the outside and place the break inside your index finger, and through the forearm toward the thumb until it heals according to its natural form; do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the shoulder blade and cannot bring the arm back to its place, you must align it with a small piece of iron rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, then do it again; restore within one day if possible; otherwise after seven or eight days once the abscess has calmed down, then stitch up the outer part with linen thread if the break is on one side.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bind another piece on the other side, if there is a breakage; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the pores of the nerves.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some surgeons say you must moisten the tendons with butter, and change it each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It seems to me not quite right, but it should be moistened with a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the tendon until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put goose feathers where the tendons are, and if at .i. sheep's skin strap, and holds the breakage, and blows on the sickly weaklings among them; do this that you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	When abscesses occur near the nose while working on them, apply a poultice of cheesecloth or cotton soaked in rose oil, or use a small amount of diapron.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there is no abscesses, then apply a poultice with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk; then place it on light gauze, not binding too tightly; and if the crack of bone fracture is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract as much debris as suitable for this case, then split open the wound, and cure foreign objects like glass or sand with suitable plasters and ointments; and if there is no internal damage to the bones, then dress the tendons, and apply linen compresses until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	For a dislocation of the jawbone, reset it as follows: hold the head firmly between your hands and gently but steadily guide the jaw back into its correct position.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	; do not be.s. I: an boster by theme the lion is to the sebt and asue
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary that if the fracture is in the right part, you place your index finger of the hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand, insert the fracture gently, and adjust it with the other hand afterwards, making them equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced into two pieces, it is proper that you stabilize by extending those parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there are movements of the teeth or dislocation, strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the fractured jaw, and place a double cloth over it; and put over this cloth a large well-made plank, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, tying it below where you can move. Then command the patient to rest and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the shape changes, reset it on the following day and then put back what is changing; place a poultice over it with fine powder from a mill or wheat flour after you have removed the clot; place a light cloth over the poultice, and if the poultice swells, ensure that the patient's position does not change, let it remain as long as necessary; many times it is healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If an abscess arises, treat as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no bone fragment remains; gently remove the splinters from that area.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it with fat according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have moved all the bones to their places and they do not remain still, thus treat the wound if it is wide, and place over it one or two splints made of covered wood until healed.
de la forcele	To strengthen him
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fractures break in many places before the shoulder, and the breaks occur in three ways: one is broken and separated into two, with fragments, and it is easier to restore; or there are breaks with wounds.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	This is the fracture when it's without wound, so have two ministers: one anoints the dislocated joint that feels strained; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the fracture in line with your arms such that its form is as required, and there be neither appearance nor imbalance.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round rod of cloth or linen, and make it as thick according to your necessity; and push in and release the strain, holding the rod with your hand, so that you set the faster equal as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the joint forward because it comes out to one side, so that the patient lies on their stomach, and places in front of the shoulder a mid-sized earthenware dish, and puts both ministers under the shoulder, until the bone of the joint is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then approach the fracture of your legs, and if you find broken pieces, it is necessary to cut into them; remove the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join by any splinting method, use one of the tools you have prepared but place it carefully to avoid injury.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 It appears like a spoon and is not sharp, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the flesh; it has two heads, as you see, one wider and the other narrower, as per the direction of the wound made when setting the bones; and when confident in a hot abscess, cut the wound accordingly, if doubtful of a hot abscess, patch the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	When an abscess comes there, then apply a cloth soaked in oil rose-colored and with ease, and place on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The straining of the bone when it feels tender and painful is that you put on the bone pounded powder of molten lead and ox fat, along with light poultices underneaturally placed over the wound; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then place double cloths above the poultices, and the powdered lead; then take a slender plank three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs evenly. Then place the board over the fracture, turning the bandage under the knee, and above the good leg; apply pressure to each part, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture steadily, treat it gently every day, and if the ligaments are weakened, restrain them; have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the knee, to raise the dislocation upwards. This will relieve the pain from the injured joint by positioning the shoulder correctly, or binding the arm at the neck without any ill consequences until XX days; then start with the powdered lead again if needed, and continue straining and leaving it as such, until fully healed; it is usually restored in no more than twenty-eight days for most people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of shoulder fractures
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 Occasionally the shoulder is broken or displaced and it should not be moved except by touch; if it's set according to the pattern of the breakage, and aligned with its natural shape in all ways you can; then put on the place powder from finely ground meal with plenty of egg whites, and light cotton wads; then put a wide and subtle plate over it, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if any part remains unsupported by the pad, use linen bandages to evenly cut through the bone. Then strain firmly so that the plate does not move from its place, checking the ligament each day; whenever you feel movement, tighten again, and ensure the plate is secure if it has moved from its position, resting your patient on their back. After twenty or twenty-five days, remove the device, but be cautious because bones do not regain strength easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes without breaking the skin and heals over, causing pain and inflammation, do as we have said in treating an abscess to alleviate the swelling.
de la brisure dou pis	Et quand ou il les apothe is soies; et doule du s’apoint the cautere sui douce a point of heal and ce, doule le croire quidem. Et seur, et l'est, li mour, as itheu de la pire chirure and dore ke les oint les points ise à peignees du sainte the cure doux the ou est:
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The fish is not often broken apart by milling, but this happens little; however, it breaks frequently when delayed.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken apart by milling, if it shrinks in size, the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all over, and sometimes vomits blood, and cracks appear in the bones that are broken, and he feels very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration if it is that the patient lies on their back, then put a pillow between the shoulders, and press the shoulder blades together, and gather the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to all possible ways you can, until the bone'cuase of fracture resembles what it should; then place plasters and cotton over the fracture delicately, or of other light material, and wrap in a piece of cloth so that it does not move, and return the bandage to its round shape on the back, and tighten gently, and loosen every hour for breathing, and if it softens, continue to tighten; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or itchiness at the site, or pain or an abscess, hurry up, remove it, and cleanse the plasters, and apply in whatever way you can for healing; then reapply the bandage, and tighten until it is well-shaped.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Certainly that the breakage of ribs comes only in large ones after the back and inside the head, and they do not bend easily because they are slick; and he feels well to inquiry at the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the mending is such that you place the break as it requires.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then apply the splint, and bind with a stake if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib breakage is leaning inside, the patient feels very great pain and swelling, similar to pleurisy, because there are no muscles; it brings fatigue, vomiting of a large quantity of blood, and it's a serious illness, and the ancients have attributed much care.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And some say it must be administered meats that inflame the stomach to push out an obstruction.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not perform anything if non-purulent abscesses are not present, unless they have already occurred.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	et to come pain and paired the cure of he is to more this ill be it occurs; often lores that a nature, but with great fear as well-e tu or, so therein the vient eyon does not are they may also comes of nus est de in such.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say among us that one places cups on the limb to draw out humors, and this seems reasonable enough; however, there is doubt whether the cups attract excesses to the limb due to its weakened state.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the wounded limb with hot oil and place pads between the ribs to make them evenly warm, then proceed with treatment for pleurisy, flesh wounds, and medicines.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured by the point of bone, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to fracture at the location of the broken ribs, and use an instrument to protect the liver; thus, one must cut the bone, gently extract it, and then stitch both sides of the wound if they are large, and treat with splints until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes forth, then place it on cloths soaked in rose oil and position over the affected area; treat while it is lying as required for an abscess, and let it remain insulated by rolls along its length or wherever it should be, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No fracture comes to the bones of the neck, and rarely does it bow; likewise with the spinal column of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this occurs in any individual, and you need to know if he will be healed or not, take care if you see his hands become softened, swollen, and lifeless, unable to move or stretch them, and when pricked with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that he is in a critical condition and if he moves them willingly without pain, understands that the bone's connection is intact, and the patient would be treated if proper care is provided.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 If similar things occur with the spine of the back, and you must know if it is sound or not, be cautious if the joints are softened, and if there are injuries present in its vicinity, and on the back jumps swelling without will; and when one has overcome pain in the abdomen, then discharges occur involuntarily.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is soothed on its back and it wants to rise, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Say that they are deadly: do not work in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is to apply warm oil or sheep fat if there is an abscess, on the spine until it is eased; then place it under one of the comforting and drying stones, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover it with cloth; then reposition the bone and sew the two edges of the wound together if they are large, using an aromatic ointment containing charcoal until healed; and if the shoulder blade is fractured, known as "chiés de la kowe," put your left hand pouch on it, place it equal to your right hand's power, then apply an emollient stone and thorn underneeby, if needed; then bind it tightly, and if there are any bones dislocated, treat them accordingly, realigning the bone and caring for the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of a break in the bone of the hip joint
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the bone of the hip joint is broken, and if it happens, there isn't much shortening at its head; it causes longness in declination towards the pelvis, brings pain to that area, deformity, and swelling where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is to extend your hand over it as long as you are on the breakage; and discern which is broken and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then align that fracture so it becomes naturally shaped.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	by the l’s alle; Man la: anud pes Equt na; also: a1tue; and ils et ses la Jil. If they can be rig;
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have put it back in place, then place on a splint, and also place a wooden or metal pin, and strain the break so that it does not move; and elevate the limb from under the ribs until it is level again.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears there, do not touch it until the abscess is eased, and then place what we have previously mentioned; and then return to restoration, and strain as needed unless there has been any injury; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a break of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, then it should be restored according to one of the two ways: where you take a piece of fresh bone, in this manner.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads with two ligaments, and place them upwards, then lay the patient on top of it; then pour some blood into the broken bone until it reaches ease, and let there be a bend in the wood halfway, then place under any heavy object or extend it by ministers; then set the screws so that the fracture is equal to his hands together, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	the; with t but more ; and so that cbutbneda or (fos;
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is more severe, restrain the ligament from below the fracture, and around it, and extend each member to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade's head, it must be that you place a splint under the collarbone and another on the other side beneath the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the ribcage, one must gently apply a lightweight splint without effort until the fracture aligns with both locations, then properly set it as needed, unless an abscess appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess occurs, do not tighten until after six days, and apply a linen bandage with ease and oil rosemary until the abscess is soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening should be that you place an iron over the fracture, assemble the arm above the shoulder blade, and put your hand on the shoulder or side; then wrap a cloth around it, and tighten above the shoulder blae, and along the arm so that the arm is in its proper position unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the fracture does not move, use splints and put a longer and thicker than others, and it's as each piece two weeks; then is healed at the bone more than .i inchaeinsses qui est lesse brisez deux semble en estaints et les semblanz. puis li os sofrai laisse dement au mielent.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the exit of an abscess and inflammation, as we have said, when restoring a broken limb, if doubt about the abscess remains, leave it loosely for seven days as we have said; then check every three days the bandage, ensuring no itching or swelling occurs at that spot, or lymph nodes cannot come to the area because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the dislocation, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accident occurs, do not dislocate it until after III days or more, and let the patient lie on their back, with hands placed on their stomach; and place I cloth of wool evenly under the shoulder, and watch each hour of day or night that the shape of the injured limb does not move or become softened by ligaments; if possible due to medicine, give them flesh as we have previously prescribed, in such a way that the flesh is tender at first; and when it begins to heal, let it grow thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within XL days in total; then one should dislocate them again and administer baths and ointment medicine to set right the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is unpleasant and ingrown, it may require dislocation for several days or months.
de la brisure du bras	The translation of "Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles" would be:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile," one small and holding the elbow, the other large and located above the small joint; sometimes the large "fabicle" is broken only, or the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When small blisters are burst, the healing is easy, and the treatment; when large ones burst, it's a bad curement, more painful than when they all burst together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only small blisters are burst, then it should be stretched lightly and kept even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large blister, then it should be stretched more firmly; extend using a splint, and raise the hand's sleeve higher than others, while smaller ones remain lower, cross them with the patient himself, placing the splint in front of him taller so he doesn't feel any labor; then extend the minor ministers towards the part below his arm or to one another, placing other ministers accordingly.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place the mirror evenly, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	In case of a break into pieces, place each back in its position; if any are out of joint causing the bone to be disconnected as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And in case of a wound from the fracture, discuss it with each individual physician; if they take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And in the beginning of restoration, if abscesses appear, then with a gauze pad made of green clay and white wax, that it not be too hard or too soft; and apply the pad gently over the abscesses until they are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the dressing and apply a paste of powdered medicine with plenty of heat, place the splints, ensuring that the fracture is more securely held than others; it must have VI splints or arms arranged in various ways: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and strain more on the site of the fracture than elsewhere, as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages be soft and moist, not too hard or rough; and use linen threads for binding, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And reward the member and the ligament after certain days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any accident comes to the limb, like itching that comes upon the limb, you shall bathe the limb in warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the binding, and if the ligament is softened and the bone healed, along with similar matters, you may proceed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if there is no swelling coming to the limb because it is too tightly bound, you must first loosen it slightly; and let it remain thus for several days until the swelling subsides, then proceed with the straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not dislocate until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 or if you cannot achieve this, then place the hands on his neck and let them be evenly spaced, and guard against movement and displacement, and sleep on your back; know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the compositions and the complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of a fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	One must know that on the back of the hand there are few fractures, and it does not occur but rather frequent bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it must be that the patient crosse kneels, and sits directly before him evenly; then places his hand under the extended thigh, extends the broken bones, and aligns them equally until they are well joined; and applies a plaster and cotton wool, if an abscess does not come, then he puts in a splint according to the amount at the location; and it is wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	by themt ja peull'* a ben the ou Rechin;s cute.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	When the fracture is in the forefinger, it is proper to place a rod on top and another underneath at the sole of the foot, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap the entire arm with bandages, ensuring the ligament between the bones is tightened.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture occurs in any of our fingers and it is a bulging fracture, position it evenly as necessary; wrap with the sole of the foot, and if you see fit, place a small straight rod to elevate the fracture without movement; and if the fracture is like those in the index or other fingers, position them evenly, bind with healthy bones that are adjacent; or bind all together in one bandage so they can move uniformly, or place above a rod as I have said. Be cautious during restoration and abscess placement, and treat any bleeding as previously described.
de la cuixe brisie	In the case of a broken hip bone: Take care to immobilize it properly, apply a splint or other supportive device as needed, ensure proper alignment for healing, and manage pain and swelling with appropriate treatment methods such as rest, ice, compression, elevation (RICE), medications if necessary, and follow-up medical evaluation.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it can be seen when it twists forward and backward; and its restoration involves placing a leech on the fracture site, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each healer extends their hands equally over his parts; and this is when the fracture occurs within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be toward the wrist, and the other ligament from under the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And likewise if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be by the knee, and the extension downwards; then place the mirror on the bone equally with both hands, so that it conforms to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and bandage, ensuring no infection arises.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess present, leave it to heal and then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in part.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with one or two layers of doubled cloth and leave excess material; then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and thread a long string between the hip and the leg, under the knee; let the end of the string be above. Then turn the leg and thigh again, wrap them with bandage without tying it too tightly at first, then start to tie firmly three times or four times around the fracture; as you move further up from the fracture, make the binding looser. Then return to the two heads of the string that were threaded between the leg and thigh, insert three pegs above them, then back to where the head of the filament is underneath, until it reaches the foot; if the bandage does not move from its place, leave it as such, but if there are no signs of infection or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if this happens and the fracture occurs again as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, then it must be handled (if possible), and if not, then the area should be cut open, and pulled out; and treated accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	At no time is the thigh broken so that pins are inserted as with the shoulder and arm; however, in such a restoration made, it does not at all relieve the patient's pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, or less or more, depending on the various constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the groove of the knee joint.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Seek to know that in the groove of the knee there is often a small fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not a full break but rather a crack or split, and occurs with any wound, feels like pain, and this is quite severe.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one places equal what is out of joint with its parts so that they can be moved as needed; then apply the cast, and if necessary, place a round plaster, and hold it as required, then address all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks such as abscesses or similar issues; apply to each accident whatever suits it, until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of leg fractures
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Seek to know that in the leg there are two bones, one called "talus" and the other "calcaneus"; and any fracture occurs as it does in the arm, with restoration similar to that of the arm accordingly, and treatments are all the same. And if both bones break together, the leg turns at every part.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a delicate bone is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and one can see it well; then it becomes deformed.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then make the extension and align it equally, and tie the ligaments evenly; however, if there is an unsightly fracture with various pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and proceed according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	is notc andtutor in the de p� by f; they oue an them; cars and it's, as much. Polete ; the bentre et + that they are
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones at the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture; however, the bones of the foot do not break and the shins are not affected, nor does any weakness occur in certain conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the foot bones, and you see these bnads protruding from one another, place it so that they are slightly raised off the ground, as if intending to walk; then put your own foot under theirs, where the bones have risen, and press until they return to their original position; then apply a plaster and dressings, placing two small pins through the belly of the foot at .ij. chiés plaints [places], then straighten it as quickly as possible, after which you should wrap with bandages around, and other things that are necessary.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	; ír fab.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If any of the bones are broken, then repair them as we have said for the hand's bones; then put a stake to the broken bone according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place beneath the foot the board that I mentioned, and press together immediately; and if there are two or three or more, break each one and set a stake according to its size, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and fasten the board under the foot; so they may align with the abdomen above the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is important not to forget other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have discussed; and treat each injury as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the breaking of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman is broken, if she lies on her back, then tilt towards the less painful side and be supported from behind; then fill the bladder with cotton wool as thickly as possible, and place it there; then have the woman stand up slowly and gradually lift her back until the cotton ball reaches near the entrance of the vagina, and returns to its normal position. And when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton ball, and once she has finished, reset it, thus doing this for seven days or so: if properly done, the fracture will be healed. If you want further reinforcement, take a pig's bladcuase, tie cloth around its opening, fill it with water; then blow through the cloth until the bladder is empty. The vagina will regain its shape; then fill it again with cotton wool and leave it like this for several days until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the forearm is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said in the thigh bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and effort to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For a fracture indicates various conditions for the proper course of restoration: therefore, so it is.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	And when the li les cil est le sait, as it qui pren que tostide l’est de. Et vous le la dote et ne puis les boute quant il quis vient l’ent, si la ou met les jors ce qn ente la gue, dont fie espleez. And for the li pute the mauve ie.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fractures with wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be properly aligned as we have testified with our witnesses.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, and there remains a stain of vitriol, unless you have something else, then begin to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	c, and tot;k; thatchtiq.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken appearing underneath the skin, it must be gently put back into place with your hands, through slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not allow you to set it even with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has six or eight prongs and its width depends on the size of the wound; and so it is necessary for the physician that he grasps three or four (prongs), according to what he needs in each bone-breaking cure; and let them be round and somewhat thick, so they do not buckle under pressure on the limb you are working on, and placed with some space before it:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palanquin", so the patient's head must be placed under the visible part of the bone; and be bound once, until they recover, ensuring they are even against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle and the swelling cannot properly grip the bone, it is necessary to cut off the head of the bnage so that the swelling can have access.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, with a fitting instrument whether it is cutting or drilling, to your ability; then remove the piece that remains in the jagged and small splinters of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned to its place, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If you do so that it is in its place, then make the dressing with a sticky black vinegar bandage, and properly put as if on an ulcer; and do not apply any ointment or other substances to the wound, lest it bring rot and decay. Then provide balms once you have restored the bone, leave the wound exposed, cover with a dressing entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and ensure it is well guarded so that the wound is not strained along with the break; and many times the foolish healers have done this and brought about death or corruption. The tension should be more gentle and flexible than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is large or bad, and you suspect that an accidental injury may occur as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to place bandages; but wrap around it, at the location of the bandages, with durable cloths.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when after one or two days there is swelling at the wound, if it seems that what you placed above has begun to work, and you apply a healing salve for wounds, as with Tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar substances.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes relaxed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is important that the limb be fitted with an appropriate splint so that the bow moves slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if more than one day passes, and it cannot be relaxed but remains bent again, as there are small pieces of bone, then you must dress the wound with gauze and remove all those unwanted pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula appears at the site, or other form of decay, it is necessary to treat it as described in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 When the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the hip or shoulder bones, as well as other similar large bones, do not attempt to reset it, for many times this results in death, but leave it until it heals; sometimes it may rejoin after XX days or XXX days, then treat the wound if you know how; and if you don't, just let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises coming over the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the swelling, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant thing to see is how the limb's shape changes; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore take care if the patient is warm: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, and any other similar substances; whether you use none of these or all together, mix them with astringent wine, vinegar, or rosewater; place it in an ointment tube, strain well without letting it separate during the day; then dislocate, and repeat with another until the swelling is gone. Or if applicable, stretch over a piece of plaster precisely made; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all inflammation from the limbs; and when the hardening has occurred like stone, and there's a need to remove it, cut off any excess on top, and treat until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains weak and delicate afterward due to many causes: one being because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many ligatures, preventing proper circulation in the limb; or due to excessive bloodletting; or from making large movements at improper times; or because there is little blood within its body, thus being weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is to have the patient eat nourishing foods and keep their body supple until blood circulation increases within them; also provide bathing care and give joy and comfort; then apply poultices on the limb, so that they draw significant healing nutrients into it, and frequently change with warm water until proper circulation returns to the limb; and let it regain its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After healing of the limb becomes twisted
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	After the limb becomes twisted following its healing, and bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb is unsightly: however, do not believe those who say that you must break a new limb entirely, and many foolish people have done so in our land; such treatments are blameworthy, leading to great harm, and sometimes death. However, if nodal tissue and twisting are recent, it should be treated with hot water, or soft herbs cooked as meadowsweet leaves, roots, mallow seeds, etc.; and a medicinal poultice is made, like well-prepared diaquilon, taking the muskroot of mallow, mixing it with pig fat or flaxseed oil, making an ointment; or take juicy figs and grind them with hemp seed, along with similar remedies that alleviate swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 Never is there an issue with bone dislocation from continuously rubbing for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And provide some movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted and hardened tissues are like stones, they must be removed with iron, up to the bone as needed by carefully using a delicate incisor; then place cotton and focus on treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, if it must now be returned without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Because if you delay, the swelling may increase and it might be difficult to reset in place; therefore, do not move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times this has caused inflammeboils and other pains; however, once that occurs, treat the patient well, then leave them alone until the swelling subsides; then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, then gently exercise each member as treatment naturally dictates its location.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	se pe en the ciles ke la dur:
des mandibules	Of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones are slightly dislocated from their usual positions and become a bit soft; or they may be entirely dislocated and hang towards the left side, causing saliva from the mouth that cannot be held in and prevents closing of the mouth, wrapping its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can result in various positions returning by itself at times.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is complete and accomplished, you must quickly reset it without hesitation, positioning in such a way that the minister dampens the patient's head, placing two drops of ointment from one hand at the root of the mandible dislocation inside the mouth if the dislocation is between both halves; the other hand should be free to ensure evenness. Command the patient to soften his jawbones and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And places the mirror so that it is centered, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting causes pain, especially when both jawbones are together; then apply warm water and oil until they can be gently moved again; do not force them to move as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are evenly reset and the patient's mouth is well softened, place a cloth soaked in ointment made of rose oil and wax over it, then lightly bind with soft linen strips; let the patient rest on their back with their heads between two pillows such that they do not move to either side or strain, but gently eat tender meat as long as the pain subsides and the jawbones are anesthetized. Then have them enjoy what they desire lightly, without forcing themselves to open their mouths for eating or drinking until the mandibles are well numb and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not restored to their original positions, fever and other accustomed symptoms may occur, and possibly intestinal perforation, or perhaps they vomit with pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know it is peritonitis; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within seven days.
de la forcelle	of a gland
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strong ones cannot be dislocated from within the ribcage and below, nor can it be dislocated once in a while without effort, yet they feel it deeply.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then press firmly with your palm to reset it, and it will return; then place over the splint and wrap it around, securing it; and the shoulder which is towards the cushion cannot dislocate again; if not, and if it does dislocate at any time, then reset the joint back into its original position as we have said; then place over the splint and secure it with a bandage, comfort the patient to rest until they are healed; thus similarly return the shoulder blade when displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder's dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 One must know that the shoulder dislocates in three ways: one way is to dislocate towards the ankle from above; and the second is towards the lower part of the thigh; and occasionally upwards, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards or inwardly for the shoulder, nor internally due to nerves. It often dislocates downward towards the leg, especially those who have little hair on their chest, as this happens quickly; but for those with enough body hair, it occurs slightly and re-enters easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes this occurs in certain individuals with swelling or bruising of the shoulder due to an abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that dislocations occur when it descends towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their variety manifest; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit near where the head of the shoulder would be, as if they were ears; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its place, nor move in any way; and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly discern it by touching; and this type of dislocation is not simply about returning when it is recent, or where the child feels ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the sick person upwards, then place stools under their seat and gently elevate the joint back to its original position; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards before setting them down again, and in a short time they will be healed.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in the past days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and treated gently with softening and soothing substances like an infusion of althaea and fenugreek and melilotus in water, and thus treated; then place the child on his back, and put a strap under the armpit equal neither too soft nor too hard, then position the heel of the foot onto the strap, and gently lift the shoulder blade, and massage the affected hand; and other treatments involve dyeing the top of the affected arm so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder returns immediately, and if you observe the child according to this method: and have an adult present who is taller than the child; and position themselves on the side opposite to the ailing shoulder, and place the shoulder underneath the armpit of the affected arm, and lift the shoulder upwards so that the child hangs downward, and other treatments involve massaging the affected hand towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, strengthen them with something heavy, so that the dislocation now returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And the joint can also be treated in another way: and it is that one makes a long stick of iron and places it into the ground so that the shoulder is level with the nipple, neither too large nor too narrow; then put it under the patient but ensure there are sheets on top, and the limb should be as long as the shaft; then extend their hand to another side formally, and the joint will return quickly to its place; and if it does not return for all these reasons that we have mentioned, make this treatment: take a stick of iron two arms wide and four fingers thick, which has a head recessed so that muscles can enter on either side from below the armpit, in accordance with this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then wrap the head with soft cloth so that it does not touch the patient, then place under the saddle of the shoulder. Extend your arms above the length and tie the shoulder to the length, placing the arm at the top hand, then put one arm over a wide shelf bar, with hands hanging downwards, leaving the body suspended on the other side: the joint will be held in place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done in any way possible, then place under the saddle an equal thread of wool and put the poultice prepared with powdered molasses, along with incense and frankincense all over the shoulder and around, then stretch below the saddle promptly, twist the bandage on top of the poultice, and wrap it around his neck, with hands hanging thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary that he moves little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal sooner; and then move more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is well-healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 If the joint is forcefully out of place due to moisture or another reason, it must be managed with three fire-cauterizations as previously described in this chapter or book on cauldration.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 6 days, and the joint does not hold, nor can lift any arm upward, then understand that either the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations towards the thigh and limbs or behind are made by impact, with hand extension, and another lever is applied; care for it until it becomes healthy again.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes weakness in the limb and tremors of movement, so often does the patient suffer painfully until the tremors are alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the displacement of the shoulder blade
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by bends and rebounds; if it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, then the dislocation cannot be reduced, as it can be clearly seen and felt; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the injured limb with its proper position, if it is clearly visible to be seen.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is lifted and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset them as soon as abscesses come to the surface, for if abscesses emerge, the repositioning would be grievous; and sometimes they cannot be reset at all, especially when they are in the back; this kind of dislocation is worse than others, and causes greater pain, and may even result in death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	When restoration is as such that it can be brought back, extend its hand to your two hands; and spread its arms wide, and the fingers following the course around, above and below, place the joint with its fingers together or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back while doubling its hand to its own hand and at the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and two assistants extend the arm, and tie off one side with bandages, so that it cannot move during extension; then turn the arm from each side, after wrapping a double-width long cloth around it; when you have brought the joint close to their hand, anoint of any oil to soften the joint, then place the joint firmly until it returns; and once it is in its place, apply a dry embalmment with egg white, strain firmly, and stretch the arm toward the injured side, leaving it bound for several days, then release.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, release the sling, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart with dusting and binding, leaving it for several days until it is securely fixed; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if it feels tightness after the joint's resetting and it moves, then bathe and rub well, applying pressure until relieved; or place greased sheep fat on the joint, leave for one day and night, then bandage, and have them take a bath; when they sweat, quickly rub the joint again, replace the fat, and take another bath; thus do this two or three times until healed; if you see it, apply moistened wheat flour warmed with butter to strain upon.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its repositioning is easy compared to other joints; it must be promptly returned to its place within the same hour as it becomes dislocated, lest it swell or an abscess develop quickly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 The resets are such that you place the affected hand under a table, stretching the fingers out and align them evenly so that they can fit their palm against the joint's appearance, holding it until everything is back in order; then you should check if it has been properly realigned; thereafter, have the patient place their back of the hand under a table at full extension for resets.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's hand on a table, and the healer places his hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, this is well; if not, strain the head of an aspenshaw with calming balm and leave as such until reassessment occurs.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if it cannot endure any longer and you are unable to reset it after several days, the joint remains dislocated; and neither this nor that is possible for the patient when their hands become weak, and they can no longer grip anything: then declare that a nerve or artery has been cut, or there is no other remedy but to reset with fire near the wound, which may not yield any further results.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at rest, place them on the splint as we have said, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and let be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is any weakness, so rub with warm water, and massage until it feels smooth.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	From dislocations of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Never are the two of the hand dislocated to either side, nor to the back of the palm or belly; then they rejoin, and dislocation is put into place in your pockets as long as it returns, then support the head of the joint, and move towards the part where it was disjoined; leave it for two days, then on that day make it even, and again secure it, as we have said, and the next day dislocate it, and make it move, and rejoin the ligament; do this often until it is tightened, and do likewise if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is sound; similarly, do so when dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The relaxation of the spinal column of the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no remedy, as it quickly kills the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 The excrements rise forcefully without voluntary action and cannot be held, resulting in softening of various members such as the legs or both arms or one; often the spine is dislocated into four parts; those that shift towards the back are called "gilbositez"; treatment for this involves resetting if gilbositez originated from childhood: if there is no cure or healing throughout.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 Those resulting from falls or blows or similar things are said by ancient methods of treatment with great words, where there is no significant benefit; but I have shortened it according to my intention and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the swelling that comes to the thigh front, there is no remedy or health; and similarly those that come straight into the sides, which cannot be treated except for those specifically coming onto the back, as I have said; and it must be that the patient lies stretched out on their face with a length equal, and be strained off from underneath them so they do not lie flat; then place two tiles of earth firmly at the head, and another under the feet, and tie a band around the hips of the ill person, and another around the legs, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the bands, one to the head and one to the feet, among the two tiles; and they are well fastened as we have said, and the priest places his hands on the spine firmly until it straightens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If it does not return with this treatment, take a stick three arms' length long, and place the patient on their side, head on the edge of the table, then position the stick under the shoulder; insert the middle of the stick along the spine; then align the feet using the other end of the stick, pressing firmly until it returns to its place; if so, turn them in a cradle that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And that you insert two ties at the top of the patient's arm on one side and towards the feet on the other, with an inch of space between each tie, both above and below; have one hole through each tie or turn it right, ensuring they are firmly secured so they do not move; between each pair of ties, insert a turning pin, as we've mentioned, with two small pins at the same length to turn the cradle. Then attach the line among the ropes on one side of the cradle toward the head and the other line towards the feet on the opposite cradle; each minister turns their cradle along its entire length, while the master aligns the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 When they are equalized, place an absorptive dressing with plenty of wool, then the poultices, and then a splint from a tablet three fingers thick to secure the joint's location and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and apply subtle nourishment to the patient until he is well; and if anything comes in at the end of recovery, administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the splint that we have mentioned earlier; on no occasion should one insert a piece of lead, nor does such an appearance occur in the rear spine causing dislocations; it is the bone cracking, therefore there should be no presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	For hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Sections that assert hip and shoulder joints are only from dislocations, not like other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, front and back; more inner than others, less forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when joining the injured leg with the healthy one, it appears longer and opens more on the injured joint than the sound, and the injured cannot double their knee at fire; and there are legs which are swollen due to a hot abscess, because the hip's head comes near.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who come in later, such accidents are opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	When it occurs in one who is before you, the sign is that they straighten their leg as completed; however, do not double bend the knee causing pain, and if you want them to walk, they cannot do so, retaining urine, swelling of the limb increases, and when walking, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	When it occurs in one who is behind you, the sign is that they cannot expand their knee or double bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, swelling is softened, and the head of the thigh reaches up to below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The return of this kind of dislocation is that one should not assume the dislocation was present initially and it persists according to its nature, there is no treatment; and it must not be assumed that it has healed.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating, quickly return the joint to its place, push it back in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will come back on its own without needing further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare the patient with strong medicine, and keep the leg elevated by two hands or tie at the knee; another method extends its hand over like putting his palms under its soles, then strains gently at the ligament near the hip; another touches the neck of the ligament; and they stretch all at once, until the injured is raised from the ground completely, and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, one must attend to its appearance when the dislocation is in the jaw, it is necessary that you elevate the patient's chin on their uninjured side, then place the ligature at the base of the thigh, and the part out from under the angle, then extend the ligature upward toward the angle; then engage other ministers with his arms, and embrace the large jaw of the injured thigh, and extend it fully forward: it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, you should bind both feet of the injured together with a strong band above the heels and on the knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then hang from the head of a beam, and from the ground two arms lengthwise; then command another minister to embrace the thigh's top, and have others hanging with the patient, who fully grasp the thigh, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 When the dislocation is at the end, restrain the patient as described in those with gilbosity, and properly straighten the affected limb and foot likewise; then apply ties at head and other joints, then insert a billet between the buttocks near the deformed area of the afflicted person; and wrap moistened bandages around it so that it does not move the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and have mirrors placed equally in his hand to align the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, this is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place on a table and press as described in cases of gilbosity, and restrain the patient by their strong side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be stretched with the sick leg quickly, and as I have said; place their pain over the sick side, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 If the dislocation is below, it is not appropriate to stretch the patient upwards or lift them off the ground, but rather they should lie as if their hip had been dislocated previously while lying on two pillows; then place something under their face, extend the limb as mentioned earlier, and apply pressure above the joint table; when the patient extends their legs, they will be equal. Then prop up the buttocks, put the plaster, and strain with a bandage so that the hip does not move. They should rest for three or four days, then release it, place something underne... If you see them as equal, strain again as before, and leave it for three days; then they can walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joint can be dislocated in three ways: into the bone and out of it, behind, and not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 When the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not reach the hip, know that it is dislocated; and its restoration so is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg as much as he can, place your back against his face, and place your foot under yours; then take his knee in your palms, draw between your thumbs, then bend both shins properly; another method extends his foot until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it gently aligns with the hip; apply a plaster over it, raise the leg towards the hip, bandage them together firmly for 3 or 4 days, then untie; and do not allow the patient to move as long as the limb is supported.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not fixed, then it must be firmly extended as we have said in treating the knee, until it is straightened.
de la dislocation dou talon	on the ankle's dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes moved but never completely set right or wrong; within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are such that the ankle is swollen, and one should gently try before reaching the part where it has dislocated: gentle attempts of repositioning must be done with hands when touched lightly only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, one must have the patient lie down straight, with helpers supporting his leg upwards at the ankle; then grip the foot with your right hand, and move it towards you twice, then elevate it higher; then place the foot firmly above. Repeat this process as we've described - lifting and pulling on the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start over again because it will return; and if it cannot be brought back this way, make the patient lie down with their back to the ground, and place a firm strap between their thighs so they do not twitch. Adjust the straps evenly around them to keep the body stable while stretching occurs; then put bands equally on both sides of the dislocation using your hands or a tie, positioned over the neck of the foot; next extend each band evenly, and let the strap remain between thighs to hold in place during extension. Then grip the joint back into place with one hand while another helper supports the healthy leg below, then the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 When it reaches the proper point, apply the dressing and plug into place, tighten firmly, bind the lump to the leg, and protect any veins behind the ankle so that the ties are not too tight; then let it rest for 2 or  three days, and if the ties relax, retighten the bandage; then release on the fourth day or a quarter of one, and advise the patient to walk with crutches for four days; and if they progress before this period, there is no assurance that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears there, it is necessary to soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it becomes healthy again.
des dois	From the dislocation of both arms and legs
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both arms or legs are dislocated, they must be stretched out with care, and it is a light task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any part of your lower back or foot, it must be that you make the patient sit upright on a flat surface or table directly underneath them, and place their leg under the affected joints, then press firmly onto the leg; and when they are even again, and nothing appears amiss, put two fingers' width of cotton padding beneath the sole of their foot, then bandage tightly, and let it rest for three days before releasing.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound occurs with dislocation and you see it must be restored, often the patient dies: so do not presume in its treatment unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it extenscriously, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow to act; and at first use things that calm abscesses quickly, and leave the sick person in God's hands, unless you see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb into place as soon as possible so that inflammation may subside; and once the limb is set properly, apply matters that soothe an inflamed abscess and treat the wound accordingly with dried ointments; and if there is dislocation with bone fracture and small bones are exposed or visible, do as we have said in simple illnesses; but guard against falling into fear, according to what I have said, because it brings consequences according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of using your weapons and body.
Amen	 Amen
