O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science and together with its fulfillment and at its end through its exposition and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this section, which is part of the work on hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and employed everywhere entirely, it has been completely forgotten except for small descriptions found in ancient books where hands have moved them.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus comes the mistake and arrogance, with minds closed and wisdom forsaken.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 Or I believe that to revive it, you should follow the treatise's guidance on exposure and explanation as well as abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I shall also use the forms of fire cauldrons and other instruments for surgery, with the assistance of preparation and explanation as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	by and ou bonte;sso ça que t1: s.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And so Hippocrates says that one without knowledge is much, but with effort it is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	 and especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you in the introduction to this book that those who are not attentive to what has been said before will err and may kill people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 thus I have wanted many times more from those who engage in this knowledge, yet abandon the theory and lack experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 For I saw a mad barber who cut an abscess of scrofulous swellings or the neck of a woman, and severed the arteries in her neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 for this is why so much blood issued that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another barber who treated a stone in a man's eye, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 if he carried away with him a part of the bladder, and he died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to extract it, and see the position of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one were to cut into it, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another barber who took care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the fracture there was an injury;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the ignorant barber strained the fracture near to the injury with strong ligatures, did not allow any bandage on the wound, and left it like this for termination.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And he commanded that they should not dislocate at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 and remain so, lest the leg becomes entirely numb and useless, leading to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I am called upon for treatment, and you hurry to come and reset my dislocated leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 and when it is set right as I hear, it becomes at peace, feeling no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But in any case, the contagion had already taken hold or limb, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 and the contamination did not cease until it spread through the limb completely lost all function.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And behold a different physician who collapsed an abscess that became inflamed due to the illness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	the et; (c.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And therefore, dear son, you must know that this art of healing is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 namely, where there is danger in various conditions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show, at each location of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 For that's why you must be cautious, so the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 If you take up your weapons in combat, and approach your illnesses easily yet firmly, and choose the best course so that by God's grace you are healed and praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 And let not grave diseases bring distressing health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And use your weapons as you doubt their effectiveness, and have faith in yourself to come from this world of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galien occasionally gave these warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take in care of diseases badly, that you are not called foolish doctors.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapters are about the fire cautery and cold medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 And about suppurations, and iron cauterizations, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapter is about tailoring and cutting, and of cupping and wounds, and extracting arrowheads, and such matters.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 And it is the chapter ordered with the forms of inflammations.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter concerns resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And it is ordered for the neck up to the head, and forms of inflammation.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the nature and harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the quality of assistance, and harm caused, is the longest word and subtle science with secret solutions.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 and on this spoke many wise men, and agreed to this;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 and I leave little of their words because I repeat the lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cauterization helps all conditions where there is material, for two types of constitutions;
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 That is to say, hot temperament inclined towards matter, and dry temperament inclined towards matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In hot and dry temperament together with substances, some consider that fire cautery is greatly helpful.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 and others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 that cautery is not effective for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat diseases caused by heat or dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 and those who argue the contrary say that fire cautery greatly helps diseases of heat and dryness that affect the bodies of people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the man and his moisture to its nature by fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it never once through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And anyway, only those who have tried it and know the procedure of fire cautery through long experience, as well as the different temperaments of people, their conditions and causes of illnesses, outcomes, and time frame.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 We have no fear of other conditions except for cold and damp illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all healers gathered and agreed on the use of fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my son, that fire cautery is a secret of healing and has greater kindness than burning medicinal caustic.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Ou li desmedical knowledge, then cure the cautery of medicine is fire and les poinz comme maint, soigne est caust estreation de healment at cauter it cile: they are medicines et que ne est. Est oint. And treatment by they s in themes, for paints you dose, as cure it medical treament of fire, the lese medicine, then c.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 Hot medications come from one body part to another by joining together, and bring about serious healing diseases in the affected member.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 and sometimes it kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The phosphorus does not do this due to its potency or goodness of its nature unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And this I found through experimentation and the longevity of my service and study in the art, which is on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words because it is not my desire to withhold from you the secret which lies in heat or fire, and the quality of the work as how it overcomes diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Or receive them into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when to perform cauterizations, they seek advice from learned men.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm occurring can be avoided with the aid of cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 and particularly when cautery is needed urgently for pains that cannot wait until a more serious harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And never think like foolish monks; 
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 For the disease treated by fire cautery has no recurrence.
et il le dient ensi;	 and it heals in this manner;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 but it is not as they think, for cautery is a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors causing pain, and works to quicken its effectiveness, and due to the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And things that cause disease can come at any time according to the complexion of the patient and their condition and its power;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 And they are combined in him due to the acquisition of meats and other things, unless cautery is administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with cautery for pain, and other things, so that pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	 But little of this happens often.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why fire cautery is considered the last resort in medicine, and that's clear.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 But they do not believe that fire cautery is valid after medicine; however, their understanding is false, and it's considered the last resort in medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they prove ineffective, then we apply fire cautery, which does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is well understood that cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of some people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that a gold instrument for fire cautery is more effective than iron, and they claimed this due to the quality of gold and the preciousness of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 and they said that the heat of fire canguary does not cause harm, but this is incorrect as I have tested it myself and found in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 And gold cauterization is preferred over iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 However, when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know if it has been heated by the color of the gold, and so soon cools.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if it is overheated.
si font au feu;	 and they make it in fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And thus there are enough hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery because we have found its application to our work useful.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from head to toe, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil caustic
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are for moisture and cold in the brain; those which are done due to a disease called "soda," and by many humors descending to the head, ears, causing numerous dreams and pain of teethache and throatache, especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is such that the patient may be purged by a solvent medicine affecting either part III or IV, depending on what the properties and nature and habits of the sick person can tolerate.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 And then make sure to raise the head of the sick person.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 And then you should have them sit with their crossed legs between your hands, and place their feet on a pillow.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 afterwards put the base of your palm over the base of his neck between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 and when it comes to your two methods, if there is bleeding from the wound then quickly apply the caustic called "olivary," of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And he makes it touch at its place with his finger, and do so by drawing and straining your hand little by little while turning.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then gently lift your hand immediately, and adjust the place where you see the small bone.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 And if you do not see it, continue the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 After taking a little bit of wool, and placing moist and soft cotton inside, then puts it at the place, leaving it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 Then put on butter-soaked fine cotton.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 And leave until the burned area is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After, cleanse the wound with an ointment called 'tetrapharmacist', until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And the ancients say, when a wound is open longer, it cleanses more.
et por ce si aide mues.	 Therefore, to facilitate healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must thoroughly clean the fire cautery if a part of the bone is burnt, and then repair what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that the cautery should be applied as much as possible, and pushed in so hard to widen the opening like the pins women use in their hair for the humours to come out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and one must keep the open wound exposed for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 After this, it should be cleaned and bandaged.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good in all cases except for some men where there is fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and I think that it would be best to leave them.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 For the head becomes weakened by continuous exposure to bodily fluids, as we testify with other limbs.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 Similarly, when the head is weak due to its natural state, and the initial sign of a caustic burn seems more healing for me, I undertake this work accordingly with greater benefit.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the pain at the nape of the neck to severe headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When pain persists in the entire head and lasts for a long time, the patient must use years and pills called "cachia," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 And if one performs the caustic treatment that we have previously mentioned, it proves effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Be mindful if the patient's headache is of strong nature and not too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then you must cauterize from that cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After performing cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and then perform the cautery where it is called "veins".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 and are the places in which you apply cups.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 and lift your hand so that it does not come up to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of elsewhere.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 and it is proper that the cautery of the horns be more delicate than those used to cauterize the middle part of the head, which is the form.
dou cautere dou chief	For both fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and extends throughout the body until evening, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the classification of diseps, none of it helps.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then you make cauteries according to two methods, namely medicinal quinsy and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cauterization of quinsy is that you pull out a strip of skin and remove the bark with the two edges, and then create an incision where the pain is most intense so that you can place the strip of skin back under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 and when it has been replaced, if it is tied and held tightly, leave it thus for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 then you untie and treat the strip of skin, and let the wound heal for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 then place a clean cloth soaked in butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the poultice, leave it until healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you see, use some of the written or divided treatises on burning medicines that I have composed.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The caulteries of iron are done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the iron cautery with which there is the shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And it is called "closed" because the head has been shaped like a bell or has a small protrusion, and within, there's a slight appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 and you place it gently back into its original position, and with your hand turn the fragment slightly, until a quarter of the edge that is curved is smoothed.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 and hold your hand so that the artery does not burn within, which is further; let plenty of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 After placing cotton on the wound, apply it to the area for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then you place soft cotton soaked in fat on it, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you decide to perform cauterization for this headache using the cautery called "cutellar" at its tip, and be careful not to burn the artery in such a headache which is not ancient.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When treating headaches as we have described in the division of diseases, and it does not work alone, and you see that the previous medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cutellar" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 and gently press it on the painful area with half a finger's length of thread, and remove your hand once, ensuring you do not puncture the artery nor reach to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 Guard the mandible so it moves when bitten, and ensure the nerves only have regard to movement and do not cause spasms in the patient, and guard against blood flow from the artery when it is severed or cutting into it causes great fear and especially for those who are unaware of it and untrained.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 Leave your hand along the path;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to stop blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you there where it takes place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that this cautery does not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, cauterize it between the skull as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 And if you see it, apply the fire cautery as described in the extraction of the artery chapter, using the cautery that has two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 and this type of cauterization is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of ears caused by coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then heat this cauterizer called "points," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After making an incision all around the ear of the patient, where both sides hold pain, and then move away slightly above the root of the ear once you have secured the opening.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 and make it 10 points around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then close the wound until it is neat.
de la torture de la bouche	Regarding the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 Pain that must be treated with fire cautery includes only those caused by moisture, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And do not perform a fire cautery on wounds caused by scratches or nerve swelling.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When treating this type of torment caused by the foam of worms and purgatives for the head and gargling, if it does not work, then you must perform three fire cauteries on the patient.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 One at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third between the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 Place the fire on the healthy part of it and make the first fire at the top of the ear just a bit behind the tip of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a piece.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 And let the fire remain until half of its color is burned off.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the form of the fire cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it is a similar method to the knife treatment that we have described before, but it requires that the knife be slightly larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after curing them as I have mentioned before, until they are healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four fire cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 Two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle, and one where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and then a fire cautery at the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And so treat as we have said before.
de litargie	From lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 This illness requires giving the patient large years and purgative pillows for the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 After reaching the top of the patient's head, place an opal on their occiput, which is as described in treatments for plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 And this is how it is done with caustic treatment:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If the patient does so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If they are cured thus, well done;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if not, perform three caustic treatments under the head, descending to the neck, with an interval of one foot between each treatment.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 And treat as with others, and if you see it worsening, perform one caustic treatment in the middle. (This is a slightly modified translation based on contextual understanding that seems more coherent)
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if surgery is needed, place it on the two horns [of a special instrument], and care for it until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 and use the cauterization called "olive," as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	From coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and dirt, as we have previously said;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After shaving the patient's head, then perform cauterization on the scalp and at each horn [of a special instrument], and again three times along the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 and if more is needed, if the body is damp and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 and leave it until you can see improvement, and remove your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After treatment until it is healthy again, and the caustic called "olive" as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain with herbs and other treatments we have described in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it is a child who cannot endure it, they should have gargling and chewing with medicinal substances to often cleanse the brain with good meats.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After removing the child's head from the cradle, and they make the caustic as we have said before, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if the patient is out of control and suffering, they should have caustics as I mentioned to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine of the lower back and neck, and it should be the olive caustic according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child patient, they shall receive a subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moisture and large phlegm, then one should apply our described fire cauldration on those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy are the diminishing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is a weakly moist corpse, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be clarified, as determined by its status in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After raising the patient's head
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 After making the bandage properly, like a circle, place it under the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and have the patient cross their legs, and hold them firmly from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 after applying the ointment, use old sheep butter to move it;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 and heat the cloth briefly, so that they may pour warmth into themselves if possible.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 after emptying the circle from within the head, let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and do this to each patient once a week with good management until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see to cauterize it by making various points on the entire caulteries.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 and then place on cotton wool in butter and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	For the healing of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	Firstly, address the issues with the eyes as I have described in the division; then begin by having the patient drink things that purify the mind and guard against all dampness, and make them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After he commands to support his head, and makes fire cautery in the middle of the head, and makes two cauldrons over the forehead near the ears together, or one wherein the dislocation is.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 and cuts out all veins and arteries that are from the crown, making the cauldrons long according to the width of the forehead.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 and watch for blood flow, and if you see too much blood coming out, then bind with a bandage using all your might.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to bandage it correctly;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 and never make a cauldrone or incision over the back near the two bones.
dou cors des larmes	Doubtless this refers to "douleurs" (pains) associated with the body. Perhaps a mistake in transcription, and should read "douloureux".
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed, and they flow in the veins near the arteries that appear before the forehead.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 and one sees that it is due to cold, phlegmatic excesses; then you make the fire cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter on the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 I perform the cauterization in the head and two cauterizations over the temples and two hemi-cauterizations under the bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 and if more is needed, gently cauterize above the eyebrow with all one small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Throughout the body's tears flowing into the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if it does not improve, then give to the patient three bowls of cooling drinks.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After the king lies down, he makes a fire cautery or oil cauldrone.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 And make two fires from the fire cautery called "clāvis" on the two sores, slightly below the hairline.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And beware of the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use the caultery called "olivary" which is this caultery.
de coi ci est li forme:	 of which there is the shape.
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you see, make two fires on the sores just like near where the eyebrows are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 and do not leave the hand except until one-third of the paper is scorched, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	by:t;
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Never does it happen that hairs become gray and prick the eyelids, and there are made fire treatments in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 Or the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in health.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 After cutting into the skin with an outline that is as smooth as the fleece of a marten, and let it begin at the sign near the hair.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then he applies softened cotton wool and musk of persea sap to the oil, then uses a fire cautery which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After the area under the wound you have marked has been cauterized many times over, ensure that the hair is burned at that spot.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 And to observe signs of health in the wound, you should see the paper retracted, and hairs raised at the point of oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Then take your hand off, and leave it thus for three days, after which place a woolen cloth in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying the ointment until it becomes healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And if hairs and the paper become soft afterwards, then resume the cauterization on that same spot, just as you did initially.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if the hair is sparse, continue to cauterize until the paper rises back to its natural place and becomes even, without pricking at the root of the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The medical cauterization of fire is such that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a mimosa leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take French soap and fine salt, half a dram each, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 And do not allow it to cool too much, then sprinkle it over the form you made like the mimosa leaf and place on the parchment.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And if the illness is only in one eye initially, work on that first, and treat them both similarly.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 Then place a piece of cotton cloth between the eyes.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And the patient's head should be upright and their eyes showing on both sides of the medicament, and press gently with your thumb each time the patient feels a tingling from the medicine, as it tingles like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, administer the appropriate medication.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 When the bite marks have passed, raise the affected area and check if it has swollen as though lifted by fire or cut with an incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And if so, that is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 But if not, reset the medication on the affected area or if the medication has not worked, until your actions are equal and your eyes are sharp.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply softened cloth soaked in butter until the wound is covered, then treat the area with anointment called 'dyafenis' and another ointment, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to protect your work thoroughly with great care so that none of the medicine gets into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the swelling becomes soft afterward and the hairs prick at their base, begin again with medication on that area properly, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment until healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And it is the form of the bellows with the mist:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this shall you apply your bindings.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 and not be returned through the right path for those who practice this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	In treating a fistula by means of cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a f지stula as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and if your treatment does not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Command the patient to put his head in your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and instruct the assistant to place the physician's head between their hands so that it does not move or drop.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 after placing soft cotton in an egg-cup or juice of parsley over the wound;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 then heat the cautery that is to be used.
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 and place it close to his head as if like a feather of a dove, with the caustic being attached. (This might be referring to positioning the hot iron near the area for treatment)
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you observe it, ensure it is properly aligned from top to bottom, and if you see it, make sure it is also straight like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 However, this must be moved for your treatment.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After pressing the abscess if it is open, and treating the pus, then drying it out.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if it is closed, work on making an opening, and treat with a poultice.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 After applying the hot caustic well, and hold your hand on the caustic to the painful part above the wound, so that your hands do not go mad.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And place the caustic in the fat of the wound, and let it rot.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you approach the beginning of the fire cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, repeat the caustic once more, and otherwise if needed, and leave for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 Afterward, place on cotton and grease it with butter, and treat the dried ointment until it is cleaned, and after forty days pass that it has been cleansed, then apply medicinal vinegar until the bone is uncovered.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And follow this as what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 Begin with an abscess, and lay the clay on it.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Afterward, put in the small split which is its form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and make into the quantity of one rubber of clay;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 and hold your hand or abscess firmly, and do not move the patient at all until the softened clay flows into its place.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 And it is proper to put on the oil for the ill person with cotton and egg white or in water;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The place of the wound is at the lower part of the anus, and it heals with a miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the abscess is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, if it must administer a drain through the vein, and return the abscess to its proper place in accordance with where it truly belongs.
des crevaices en levres	For bleeding in the lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur bursts on lips called 'hairs', especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	How you treat these bursts as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment does not work, then apply a small incision-like fire caustic according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And apply mustard plaster to those cracks until they are fully healed.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the chancre, let the leg be washed until it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	; by themi;
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the ear, or on the roots of the teeth, after decay and pus formation, it becomes aged and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 And you should treat it as we have described in sections, but it does not improve.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Then it is necessary to apply the fire cautery according to the quantity of the furture.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After opening or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the iron has cooled off from its surface and bottom.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do thus once or twice after the healing of what we have said about treatments, until it is well.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 And if it is healed in this manner, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 And if not, it is necessary to expose the joint and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find described in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	By the slight movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you heal them with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head in your hands.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 after cooling the fire cautery so that you will later apply it in such a way as to place a chain on the tooth. (Note: "cainn" is an archaic term for "chain" or "loop," which could also mean a tool used for holding something in place.)
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 Et place dans le cautère chaud hâtivement, et tende ton bras de manière à ce que le malade ressente la chaleur arrivant à la base du dents.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 Après lever votre main et reprendre le cautère selon votre volonté ;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 Après remplir la bouche du malade avec de l'eau salée, enduisez-la pendant une heure et demie froides.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the gums are softened and held still, and the infected moisture dried out.
de la dolor des dens	Of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 Lorsque la douleur aux dents survient par raideur ou chaleur, et que le traitement médical n'est pas efficace, alors il faut procéder à un cautérisation selon les deux méthodes :
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 Et cautère d’huile et cautère par le feu.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 Pour la cautérisation à l'huile : prenez de la graisse de veau, et faites-en un bouchon dans lequel vous pouvez insérer une cuillère de fer ou d'argent ;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, apply butter-like meal on the sore tooth quickly, and hold it in place until it is cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 And often enough until its virtues reach the root of the tooth; if you see butter-like meal on linen and cotton that has been cooled, apply it to the aching tooth and keep it there until heat comes to the closure of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The fire cautery is such that you take an iron or copper vessel, and it should be large enough so the heat does not reach to the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cautery, wait for it to cool down afterwards, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Often do this, for the pain will persist on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter during the procedure of this cautery and then let it rest.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and thus are the forms of this cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And perform a cautery on the eyelid you wish to, according to what you can afford.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 and this is the form of the cataracts:
des scrophules	Of scrofulous tumors
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When scrofulous growths are due to cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then apply the hot iron cautery as described hereafter, so that it has openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 And apply the hot cautery to the abscess once or as needed until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 If the abscess is small, apply cautery accordingly to its size and leave it as such for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And put on cotton soaked in butter until the inflammation subsides.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After, treat with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the joint:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When the moisture overwhelms the channels of pain in the groin, especially when it comes from cold exposure, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged with soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After applying the fire cautery to the throat's root and ensure that you do not come close to the actual throat, but only slightly touch it with heat.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After that, the other fire cautery is applied to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is called "clavicle", which we have shown previously.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and heals if as we have said before until it is healthy again.
de la toust	Perform the treatment at the cauterization of the throat, or incisions, or if necessary, and as long as it is necessary incised (or lances) to be performed along the joints dou cervical spine; et s’il est plusors du pains ne. Et adonc et s’il sont cauterized dou chanfreux de la veuze au lieu dou painful; et li chiés, si nul que tu puet, ou se l'oeufs
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all diseases of the palm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or thirst, and it is an ancient disease, then they apply two fire cauteries on either wrist.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 and another fire cautery in the middle of the feet between the two breasts (mammae).
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 and it is called "clavicle" as per the form described beforehand.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see it, perform fire cautery by touching all the fire cauteries called "points" as shown in the form for ear diseases.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And extend the points up to XXX or around them.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the dislocation as previously described, apply the cautery with three times according to this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, as you make them in three places simultaneously.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first address the dislocation initially.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Afterward, apply soothing substances on their back and ribs;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 after that, remove the core which is within the thickness of your left hand's index finger.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the caustic which has two iron nails inserted to mold it into shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 and cauterize the core until it pierces up to the ribs, then apply four caustic treatments together.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 and therefore cauterize with the caustic that has three iron nails, so that the shape of cauterization are these four caustics.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and they are like the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the caustic that has three iron nails.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time should it be approached near this one nerve because there are eight incisions;
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After applying the fire cautery, let them break with salt.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 Afterward allow the patient to rest, and do not move their limbs for long periods until they are well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it becomes dislocated again, such events are rare; then perform cautery on the thickness above the cauldriform cautery, or many cauterizations in close succession.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is repositioned, and there may be bone fractures and the patient feels better.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach there are coldness and excessive moisture affecting its temperament, causing numerous types of catarrh to occur, and following usual remedies it brings no benefit; then it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on their back, extending their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After this, apply three cauldrons of fire from under the cup to the ass area in the amount of two ounces, at every incision, and then two cauldrons on each side until they form at an angle of three degrees, with space between them so that when they are pulled apart, there is no joining together.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and the cauldrons should be placed as close to each other that they prick both legs on their knee, and the cauldrons should form according to this shape without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you see a large fire cautery within the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 And those who fear this caustic method should use the tweezers to press and then sign above the stomach exactly where you see inflammation, according to the quantity present.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 Then cauterize with the entire caustic substance that is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound we have obtained before it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When the liver comes with pain from cold and moisture and bloating, as it is overly removed from its natural state by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 and the patient is treated as we have described in sections, but it does not benefit them, so it must be elevated above their heart.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 and apply three caustic substances according to this method, shape, and quantity above the liver, avoiding the epigastric region where the lower ribs meet.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And between each fire cautery is the swelling of one finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 and let the fire cautery be long in all parts of the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 and it should be warmed enough so that two-thirds of its face is warm, and let the patient lie down properly on their feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 and if he cannot do this, then let him be lying down with his legs extended and his arms lifted.
et c’est li forme:	 And here is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And if you wish to do so, fire these scalp wounds with cautery, if you are skilled in the art and careful not to burn the entire face as it would dry out all of the body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And it does not extend to a boil, for the core is very subtle there and one must feel carefully to examine.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When you have an abscess in the liver, and observe if it's on the surface of the liver or underneath its membrane.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 If it is on the surface, then the patient feels pain but not too severe;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 And if it's underneath, then they feel unbearable pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And when this treatment requires a mirror, the patient should be placed propped up on his bed;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 Then you must tie off the leg or where the abscess is, and then heat the caustic which looks like a sponge, as follows:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 And perform cauterization with a hot iron until the hair is burnt off, and continue to the joint, until all the sores are healed.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Afterward, follow the treatment for pus removal until it is cleaned.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And it does not require any other method of this cauterization than by those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have spread at some point.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can hardly work, but it always seems to me that he should rest.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Of the cauliflower-like swelling
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said that one should perform root cauterization on astragalus herbs in the following manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take a root of astragalus that is as long as you can find, dry it and make it just as thick and long as your thumbs.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And the muscle in oil, and grasp it with fire, and cauterize with a cautery between the clavicle and neck, and several small caustics slightly descending on the part below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And other caustics between the fifth rib and the seventh, slightly inclined backward a bit.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And one caustic above the thighs, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two more on each side of the ribs behind the previous caustic between the shoulder blades.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not grip too tightly with your hand, but rather open widely as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And an ancient said that no man uses the fire caustic as one shaves, and warms it and places it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And then a great pain occurs, as we have said with abscesses of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear or the patient dies immediately, where a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.
de la mice	Removing hair from the area with fire cautery can cause burning and discomfort to the patient, but it may also lead to quicker healing if done properly under professional guidance.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease known to us as 'mice' and its divisions in wounds, if there is no improvement, then there are three methods of fire cautery that all work well.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 There is a method where you make three or four cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the vein, following the liver cautery that we have mentioned before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 and do not hurry with your hand over all the cauteries, and let the patient lie on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another method of cauterization is to heat the one with two horns, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 And lift the edge that is at the vein's location or where the patient'cuesthesis comes from the left side, and make elevations as you lift the edge according to its breadth, following the body's length, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After inserting two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, then use a fire cautery, and so there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see, causticize with all the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the cure when it has become swollen for long periods, this means moving as the other previously mentioned treatments.
de ydropisie	From dropsy (edema)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Caustics are not used in hydrotherapy; that is called "ascluetae" method.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is time for you to make four cauterizations around the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back above the spine, and one at the genitals;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 and place the caustications close to the esophagus near the core.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After leaving the cauterization open for long periods to drain pus, do not abandon treatment of the patient after caustication;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing would proceed swiftly, and they will be together with two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The form of the fire caustic for the abdomen is as we have previously shown.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 and that for the back be an olive-shaped piece, just as it has been set here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	From the swelling of the veins
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in one who is diabetic and full of golden-colored pus, it is necessary that you causticate on the back between the little finger and ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 and lift your hand with the caustic moving towards the tailbone.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too deep in, so it would draw out the yellowish sweat and be done with the caustic tool accordingly: according to this shape.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After, do two caustics on each leg at the ankle joints.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 and let the caustic be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, on the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 And let the cauteries remain open for a long time to heal properly, so that they close completely.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After treating other wounds as we have described.
de la menoison	Of a dislocation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When a solution of the stomach comes from cold and moistness, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines have been weakened, they cannot be treated by conventional methods.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 and you see the patient is suffering greatly with strong virtues, then make a large fire cautery on the stamency as described above or an intestinal cautery, where the cautery circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 and four subtle fires within all the fire of leeches are applied, and two on the groins.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, then perform fire cautery on the fingers, and one caustic point on each joint, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large ones, because it is beneficial when there is good assistance for treatment.
de la cure des emorroydes	of treating swellings
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When bunions are at the base of one or more toes and are old and consist of large cold and damp corrupted humors, they should be treated as we have explained in sections; if it does not help, then do cauterizations.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 On the spine at the back of the neck, which is slightly forward and gradually widening into a triangle, apply cauterization near the base of two toes.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 And if you believe the stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and the face swells, then on the face apply a large cauterization to the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and several small cauterizations in other areas;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the limb until it is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage called "theal"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you cover the festered part, if it seems to be hairy, and then set the fire directly on that covered area.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and let your hand and the caustic burn until blood vessels are born, from which the pus comes out.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 do this once or twice, and if there is much festering, causticize each as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 after applying beneficial ointments until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 and if you causticize with a large caustic on the festering area, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound improperly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening wounds, we will discuss this in detail; if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is an occurrence of fistula and it becomes old and rotten with corrupted moisture, you should examine thoroughly the entire tent, and know its full extent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After the caustic that appears hairy is set and inserted into the fistula according to the amount that was previously entered therein, continue with the caustic until the corrupt and rotten body parts are consumed, once, or twice, or thrice, depending on how much is needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And watch for burning of nerves which are within, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 If the fistula reaches into the body of the bladder and intestines, watch for these lumps, do not attempt to cut them out in place without knowing whether they are benign.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 After healing the lump as much as it becomes healthy, and if the lumps are swollen, and materials have been long extracted, then know that the lump is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 And if materials have not been extracted, understand that the lump is inflamed, and corrupting the bone at its root.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And thus, as one of those which we say in place.
de la maladie des reins	For the disease of the kidneps, first assess the symptoms and severity; then consult our medical knowledge for appropriate treatment. If there's an obstruction or inflammation present, proceed with caution and consider dietary changes along with specific herbal remedies to support renal function.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When the pain of cold comes with great swelling and does not desire to have intercourse, then it is necessary for you to make a fire caustic on both sides of his testicles as we previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we cauterize it with fire, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	For bladder issues.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery on the part behind the bladder where the hairs begin at the palm of the hand. There should be one cauterization to the right, one to the left, each as long as our finger.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 and you make another fire cautery on the back if necessary. There should be two such cauterizations.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 And let the cauterization extend according to the form described beforehand.
de la marris	of the joint
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When leprosy is cold and wet, not allowing it to be conceived, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, he feels great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then it must be done as we have said with the urinary tract cautery and two cauteries forward on the back:
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 And let it be the clavicle cautery, as we have mentioned.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the slimy secretions descend into the hip socket, and for this reason it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together:
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And the muscles are found to be detached from their place, it is necessary to perform a cautery like a circle on the hip socket with one cautery in front of the dislocation as it turns so that the socket remains within the circle:
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And if such cauldrons are like those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if these cauldrons are not present, then make three large olive oil cauldrons and the cauldron should be made just as all colors.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And boil until it is cooked through.
de la dolor de la hainche	From thigh pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes to the buttock area, and it is from coldness and dampness, and the patient suffers as we have discussed in the section and treatment does not help, and the disease is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 Then it is necessary to purge the patient of large foul humors with putrid pillules or other good-smelling pillules.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After performing the cauldrons;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 The manner of this fire cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 It consists of the following: namely, burning remedies and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 You should cauterize the back of the thigh with three triangular cauterizations following this pattern: ensure good depth and size, leaving space equivalent to the width of a thumb between each cautery, and make them olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 At no time should you perform cauterization in the middle of the thigh's head because there are four following this pattern:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see, when performing the circular cautery as we have previously mentioned in the thigh'cupping. This step is crucial for reducing blood flow and promoting healing by removing damaged tissue or creating an incision to drain pus from an abscess. The text describes a method of using fire to perform surgical
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 But do so in a way that the circle contains the entire elbow, and all sides are smoothly rounded.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And that is the way to do in sciatica when the pain holds in the hind leg and does not reach up to the thigh or the shin.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it reaches to the thigh and leg, make the cauterizations where the patient indicates the pain holds them, and four on top of the ankle, slightly left.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 And let it be a flesh cauterization, and remove the thickness around the joint.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if the patient feels that pain extends to two or three fingers up from their wrist or near it, cauterize there where they feel the pain at either three points or four at what is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if necessary, if it does more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if it is known that the pain is from below the groin to the thigh, make a flesh or circular caterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations not to harm either the cauterized area or the large arteries when you burn them, and do no greater damage or constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen others who made a cautery on the heel of the foot, and they continued until the entire leg was swollen, resulting in the same for the foot, which became pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a stomach condition which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and the other as per this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the sage say in the cautery of the haunch, this is how it is done, make a tool as large as a small boat oar or slightly smaller, and have it with spaces between each like that of a fist's width from one space to another.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And the gaps should be two parts wide and as numerous as fingers, and there should also be a good iron bar for support.
et c’est li forme:	 This is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And it should be heated until red and soot-free, then place it upon the bag of the affected haunch, and rotate over its outer edge.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 and causticate once with each tool, leaving three days in between.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 And then make an emplaster with butter, and leave the wound uncovered for long periods of time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying the ointment, allow it to heal until it is sound.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Albuquerque says we rarely use this type of cautery because of its appearance, and few dare to do so.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 However, it is one of the good cauldraries that can be suffered, where it may fit.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The medical cauldron that is burning shall be made with an instrument between two edges so that the margin of the door descends, and it should be either iron or brass in length, and at the top have holes spaced as two pins apart;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they are open on both sides and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After placing the sack on the patient's chest with their back to the side, and then place your hand heavily above the sack.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After pouring between the two circles of warm pitch that have been heated over a small flame for one hour, and allowing the patient to feel the heat and dryness on their skin.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 Because there is also numbing like from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the numbness is gone, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the pitched chest, leaving it like this for three days, and apply butter until what is black from bruising has healed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 And he leaves them to rest for three days until they harden;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and this would be the last remedy after the ointment treatment once it is healthy again.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain extends to the thigh or up to the leg, then you must use an instrument that turns according to what you did on the shoulder equally.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 and this is the manner of hot turning, which I have written in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take equal amounts of alkali and quicklime, grind them together, and put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 or if there's a small hole that needs to be enlarged so that the point of a knife can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 and put on that pot another well-leaded pot with alkali and salt and gentle heat underneath, until there are one or two layers of powder as you have thoroughly ground in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And let it remain so until the pus begins to flow and form clots, then take all of that pus, and pour it onto hot charcoal and into alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And if there is a lot of pus, it must be treated with medicinal pastes and other members' fire cauterizations.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For it is another work as before, and if with other remedies where one properly cauterizes the knee just as in incision and honey from cashew nuts and charcoal mixed with soap, all these things blended together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galiens relates a treatment in which a lord was healed of ankle pain and sciatica; it had much relief, and said that no other remedy was used, and that he recovered once when this cure was done, after being bathed as it is instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And he advises in this manner that you take the green and dried leadwort herb, grind it quite finely with a little fat, and apply it to the knee, thigh, and leg where pain resides.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he leaves it for three hours, depending on the amount by which the patient no longer feels thirsty.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then let him enter a bath to warm his body somewhat, and make him lie down, and the pain will depart entirely, leaving him healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use fire cautery for such remedies unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat intestines, it helps greatly.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 and must be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take the linen and wash it with old oil, and place it in the hollow that is between the thumb and first finger, which are called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 After taking dry goat intestines and grasping them in fire until they are ashes, place it on the wool, and leave it until it is soot-covered.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 and do this again, and keep doing so until you think through your sense that it reaches the thighs, and the pain is stopped.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 and these methods of cauterization are called 'goat intestine cauterizer.'
de la dolor dou dos	It causes great pain in the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion, or from too much blood loss, or from resembling spread cold matter, of none of these matters does cautery hold value, except for those coming from an influx of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 After the patient has been purged with foul pilules or other similar substances, they should be made to stand on their back where the pain is felt, three lines marked by dots, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 And let the cauterization be done according to the cauterizing method called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 and if you see, make III caturers or IIII at the central vertebra in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that their necks become tight when they move, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 and you find it in the lowest spine and it appears among the others above.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and examine it, then cauterize with a caustic cautery as follows.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the fire cautery marks each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, using a cutting caustic around the spine at points two or three lines apart, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the wound until it is clean as we have said, and be careful not to perform caustic treatment in a location full of nerve tissue.
de la dolor des jointes	For the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When joint pain is from moistures that are spread to every limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the foot, which physicians properly call "gout," and when it is due to cold causes and cannot be cured by medicines, then they are treated with caustics in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 Make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizing be of an olive shape in this manner:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is a need to grasp above the face of the foot, then make caustic treatment everywhere that we call "none".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And when the pains reach to bones and other joints, which happens often, then make fire cautery on each big toe with three or four cauterizations from each part, for all olive-shaped caustics.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if more is needed, then make it more, but do not hold your hand away too far until the color of the skin has scorched.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains extend to the knee and back, treat with the fire cautery as we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if the pains are in the hands, make small indentations around the fingernails.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there is no pain in the fingers, make indentations on each joint and along the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 and if pains come near the edges or shoulders, caution each area, and give good care to the patient while administering remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you manage it well and purge moisture, he will be made whole with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	For the treatment of scurvy:
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When numbness comes to the fingers and they become limp with new symptoms, it is necessary when you see them healed, that you do not use any remedy on that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 and let him use things that ease his stomach so the puke rises from within.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 After he has sat on his back between your hands, command him to wash the area until it is restored, and reset the joints in your arms, and sew up from under the numbness around the bone of the thumb, and do a sign like three-quarters of a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until he is clean and his eyesight is clear.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then reset the bones to their place.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 and ministers, you shall dress your hand so that they do not return backwards.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 and work well on the patient's thighs, and place a cord under him, then a strap over the thighs, and another over his foot where he feels pain in his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 then place the cautery on the mark with your entire hand, and keep it straight and as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again until you get to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 and be subtle that the flesh does not protrude when you perform the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 That you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 And so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your works are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it is necessary that the fire cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and large people also proportionate to their stature.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three days he will treat the burn with butter until the scald is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After other salves are applied until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well-healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that its nourishments be lengthened so that the boils do not break out when he gets up to walk in his room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be adorned with a well-made belt, and wear it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And have good rest, that he works little and guards against excessive drinking of liquids and eating, and shouting too much.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when teaching this, be completely free from harm.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting within this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal surgery
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When windings come into other bellies and are known to you that they do not grow anymore, then make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be one third of their size.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 Afterward, as we have said.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 And none of the ancient ones have said that you should apply fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first mark the level of the head and draw a line for the width above the stone, and another one below, and place your hand throughout the entire fire scalpel.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 However, the first incision is lighter and easier to move.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	From old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it should be cauterized with the fire scalpel known as "points", and the incision should be made according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, strength, location of twists, and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 If it is free from harm with the first cauterization, it is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If such is the case, commence another cauterization upon it, as custom dictates that it should be moved to the limb closest to it, so it requires you to make the cauterizations until the patient is free from harm.
de meselerie	Medicinal treatment
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 Sometimes they are healed by fire for great help, and particularly the illnesses that come from the decay of moisture and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 Can you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and neither recedes nor remains, and you suspect that corruption may affect the entire patient, then make V cauteries on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I am making V upon the forehead, and one near the end of the eyebrows.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 and III on the II horns, and I behind the temple area.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 and leave the hand to where the cautery reaches almost to the bone, and stay until blisters form so that vapors of large humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 and cauterize above the eye as it appears before you.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 If the messenger is scattered throughout;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 And if it is clearly visible, then you must perform the cauterization with the cauterizations that we have mentioned previously: on the front of this area, and two near the neck, and six along the spine at the back, and one above the groin and another below, and two under the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 And two along the ribs, and two at the shins of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and toes, and over the palms' hollows.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And beware of the nerves that lie behind the calves, do not cauterize them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And never perform a cauterization on the bone of the wrist and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver's location.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that the more you perform cautery, the greater the aid it provides, and benefits accrue.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the patient feels no pain during cautery as healthy ones do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it should be that the cauterization is large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in methods of handling iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing them with a paste made from flour several times with honey and other remedies until they are healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healed, then you perform cautery on the limb according to its size and severity.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 and let the cautery be slightly painful at first touch.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat with ointments until healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And at no time is done cautery and to the hand, foot, or back, when it follows the nerve that moves the limb, thus this swelling occurs.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And in any case, no one interferes unless they are familiar with the limbs and the exit of the nerves moving within the body.
de albaras	In times past, there were certain individuals who could be found in various towns known as 'albaras', specializing in the treatment of wounds with their knowledge and skills.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" is old, and medical means are ineffective, then you should cauterize with a hot iron somewhat small, according to the quantity of blood seen, until it turns white and changes color.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 Then the treatment with fine flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of calf's gallbladcuetts.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And mix all together, bind with cloth, and apply heat to the area until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a sore begins to develop, and you see it as an opportunity for treatment, use the fire cautery in the shape of a circle around the entire sore area.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And yet the wise say to perform cautery just as with a gonorrhea.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 And yet it does not seem good to me, for I believe that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted this to happen before.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 A more proper course is that it should be cauterized nearby, with the cautery called "circulation," as we have said in many of cauldrations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot die down
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When some have an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death or due to the excessiveness of its effects or by the state of the patient when they are very old (that is to say, too weak) and have little blood, or for a while.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 And you see them hasten to die.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 Then, accordingly caulk around with many small burns by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After that, leave it as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire cautery pierced, heat the cauldron of which there is a hole:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And put your hand in the midst of that illness called 'adubelati' until the cauldron feels its core, and be such cauldrons that the patient senses behind them somewhat so that the course of the pus is directed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until it is completely healed perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way to name the disease is "corrodens," and it's nothing but a mass on the limb, as fire dries out logs in a similar manner.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this illness on site which can suffer fire caulking altogether, then fan the burns widely small and large as appropriate for its location or disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After caulking all parts until you have removed all the infection and nothing remains of it, that everything which is corrupted be excised.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it be for three days, and apply poultices with oil until the burns from fire are healed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying the ointment treatment causing warmth.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three days no health returns, this is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if not, then resume caulking on that which remains of the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this inflammation is sometimes treated with cold medicines at the site of fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 However, fire cautery is more helpful; and I have already described the treatment with cold medicines in the section on poultices.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 Take the quantity you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	small pearls coming to the fingers
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Many times it happens that under the feet is a disease we call "close," which is a large swelling affecting the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatment for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Fire cautery is like heating an iron as with the blunt end of a bowl, and it should be made of good iron to accommodate the nail at all parts, and have subtle edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 After heating it thoroughly on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it feels hot at the point of the nurture.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 and leave it as such for three days until it begins to form pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 First make a poultice of mashed herbs with honey, and leave the poultice on throughout the night, and it will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the place of application with soothing ointment until it is healthy again.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are turned towards the rear of the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply a hot water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	 and occurs in one manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 take a bone of iron or lead, or a spatula blade, and place it on the nail and its root, that is to say for warts:
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 and place the bone so that it surrounds completely, then put some hot water on it, hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the bone reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep down to the root:
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 The patient endures a bit of the tickling of hot water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then leave it so, and it will detach from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do another afterward, until you have examined all those on the body; then treat with ointments that contain warmth.
li cure dou trembler	by tin la ouest anyt lesse s’enlde;
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 When anyone suffers from trembling due to coldness or fever of the quartan kind or other, it is necessary that you make four cauldrons on the spine of their back, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 and one near them, and one over the stomach at the olive oil caustic.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 If they will continue to tremble, it will preserve their health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Of purulent swellings
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Never appear visible in front of a body bathed or pus-filled lesions, which come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 if in the first instance when you appear that you make cauldrons over each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 A subtle cautery made of mastic wood, where the tip is grasped by fire or a long-rooted astragalus, or with a lenticular caustic.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And at no time should they be cauterized from the start when noticed, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any lumps in front, but are relieved of excess which comes about, and become healthy.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Many times there occur great bleedings from the artery that is severed at the wound that comes to the periphery, or in the incision of an abscess, or with a caustic on a limb, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And it is a very difficult thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 And in any case if this occurs with someone, quickly put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very hard until the bleeding subsides from under your finger, so that no more blood flows out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 then apply small to large olive oil-based fire caustics until they are all reddened.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 then take I (an unspecified medical substance), whether large or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and apply the fire caustic to that vein while holding your finger, until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And continue doing so one after another until the bleeding has stopped.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 Ensure you do not injure the nerve nearby, and that no other harm befalls the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 And know that if the vein cuts off, it cannot be properly tied again when the vessel is large; unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 or through cauterization, or by pulling out when it is not treated, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that can stop the bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 and thus be tied off and strained accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer proper stanching by wrapping tightly with cloths or applying burning substances above, or other similar things; if it does not help much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if it happens to anyone and they do not have a scar or medicine present, you should place your index finger over the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is tied off above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And it should not move, but the cold sweat must often be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 Therefore make incisions forward as needed for cauterization and medicine application.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require fire-cauterization or burning medicines, as well as poultices and salves, along with their preparations and forms.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I have included that chapter on head injuries up to the skull, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method for what is found easier and as you wish.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	In starting this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is greater risk and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore more caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess, and wound care, and arrow extraction, and cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 When there is doubt and fear, death comes to some.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I caution you to not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways in which people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 If they come from such who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily due to the severity and extent of their disease.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And one must have fear for these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And there are some who lose their senses, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Wait," they claim, "I am healed;
et li maladie est despitouse.	 And the disease is treacherous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 You should not easily consent to those who come to you in this manner, but rather put greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but judiciously based on what you are sure of and can have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 And use prediction and indication in treating your patients so that health may be restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 And this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and the memory of God.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	And I have ordered this treatise by sections as I spoke of the section on cauteries that I instructed from head to toe, so that you may find it more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water at the top
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 I say that this illness often occurs in infants during childbirth, and when the birth is too strenuous for the infant's head.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 and it never arises from any known cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, and all those that I've seen it has quickly brought death.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 and therefore, it seems to me worthwhile to pay closer attention to this aspect of treatment.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I have seen a child whose head was swoln with water and the skull grew every day until it could no longer support itself.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 And due to so much moisture it caused death, and this moisture is gathered from under the bone above the shoulder blade, between the flesh and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And when such work is done if the moisture is between the flesh and the bone, and abscesses are small, you make a wide incision into the skull.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And it shall be of the same length as we, until the moisture subsides.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 and then you do this for the shape of the paralysis:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is from under the bone, and the signs you see at the corners of the head are exposed on each side, and the sharp pain occurs when you press it with your hand inside, and this has not been restored to its place:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 If it is necessary, you must make three cuts within the head as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision, remove all pus.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After making the incisions of linen and powders, add wine and oil, and leave it so until the fifth day.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be evenly pulled out, and have the patient eat dried meat with a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way of incising is to examine whether there are signs of large abscesses or collections of water.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 because it should never be present beforehand.
aucune fois derrier;	 and it should never be behind either.
aucune fois en destre;	 nor on the right side. 
et aucune fois en senestre.	 And never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Therefore cut where there is an abscess open, and fill with water, and heal according to what you are able.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 and be careful not to cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 and allow for a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and evacuation of fluids.
de reume	Restore
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarra" occurs in the eyes or legs and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is the fire cautery where you cut two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 It is therefore necessary, when you see them covered, that the patient turn their head backward.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 then rub the wound with a rough cloth until you see the vessels, and then remove all bandages from the patient's neck.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 then look where it bleeds, and the veins on both sides are behind the ears, but few have been put back.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Then sign the edges of the wound with a heated piece of iron, then cover both sides with a thick bandage made from two parts until it reaches near the bone and is wide at the top.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the strip underneath the artery and cut above it as two parallel lines across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, blood flows continuously upwards from it.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the artery does not open upon feeling, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then sign with a hot piece of iron and continue until reaching the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 and that amount of blood you must let flow is six ounces, and possibly a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the replenishment of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 if it remains under the bone with no spinal cord exposed, then apply a dressing where there are none, then bandage and treat with ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When migraine comes early with acute catarrh, due to moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old headaches and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical remedies which do not benefit, so we draw out the arteries from the temples and perform cauterization as we have written.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the method of extracting them is such that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is not easily replaced as with some men who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 and if it is restored, the patient should stretch their neck with a piece of cloth, then rub the area with an abrasive cloth, and apply warm water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 then take the splasmatil from where it is formed:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 then lightly scar the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the corners, and tie it off with threads from each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if the arrow is fine, pierce to the tip of the hook bone, then bind that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not properly set, then he will always have pain throughout all of it.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 And treat from six to three inches, just up to three inches.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the arrow is large, it must be tied in two loops of strong, twisted silk thread to prevent decay at the wound site and ensure blood flow away from the wound.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then bind the excess tissue between the two loops at the same time, and then, if you see it necessary, cauterize with a surgical hot iron up to the bone as long as the joints are cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 This is the completed work; if the patient does not have a fever and is of warm temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 For the fire cautery serves to finish the pus:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 Because it is of greater aid in dealing with pus.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 Or, for extracting the artery, one should fill its place with old cotton and then put it back well made.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when you remove them, be sure to treat with dry medicines that produce heat and bandages until it is healthy.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if there is no blood flow as you do this, quickly cover it with fire cautery, where you fill its place with vitriol and stretch your hand that the wound be cleansed.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you do not have it in sight, keep your hand on its place until the blood flow freezes, and apply cold water there until it flows again, and wrap as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And he who performs the extraction of arteries should causticate the vein with this sharp fire cautery in two parts, but the sharpness must be well tempered to preserve the heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when inflammation is too intense, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And it should be between the two knives with a space in the middle, and then when you have secured both blades, use the hot iron until reaching the bone, and cut the vein into two halves.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 and they should be separated between the two edges because it is not entirely reliable with this type of fire cautery in every case.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and here are the forms of the fire casters:
des larmes	From tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears from the eyes descend into veins near the forehead's strength of flesh, and it does not benefit at all from medical treatment done there, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel their forehead tremble as if in fear.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And if they are held oily and damp so that the skin of the paper is chalky, and the papers are swollen, and scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment may be necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And they called the old remedy "contusion treatment," and so you make it over to the patient with this condition on their forehead, then create three cuts or evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 and one of the cuts just like two thumbs together across the forehead down to the bridge of the nose, and the others two fingers above the skin, but beware not to incise the arteries that are at the level of the two fingers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And align your hand with the extension of the two jawbones, so that each wound has a length equal to three fingers spanning the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And prepare a piece of sponge and several cloths for soaking up the blood, then use the spatula to apply it twice on each part where this shape is found.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 From the incision that extends from the temple to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 And scrape off all the core material that is between the two incisions across the entire facia overlying the bone; then make another opening from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this pus-like substance.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you place in the first cut an instrument called "culterellum," which is very sharp on one side and also smooth but not cutting on the other, and this is its form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the splint facing towards the chest near the heart, and the underside of the ribs towards the bone, and support it as much as it reaches to the middle opening.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut off all the vessels that arise from the head down to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens into the core; then make another opening in the middle incision up to the other one.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 And then remove the blood evenly, and express its location for collecting the blood.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 Then place a tent of fine cotton in each cut, and cover with cloths soaked in wine, oil, and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days, let the joint heal, and abundantly apply a water-based poultice, then treat with a balm of basil oil, along with other remedies used to heal wounds, until it is sound.
dou reume des eulz	To examine the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When anyone suffers from frequent and long-standing gout, and you see the eyes swollen and small, causing weakened vision, and burned corneas.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 When the hair falls out, causing intense pain at the crown, and the patient sneezes.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 Then from these occurrences understand that such materials and those cataracts come only from many veins, and the physician treats accordingly if it is so.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And instruct the patient to place his forehead on it, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another with wide notches.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And begins with the cut of the left temple to the right temple, up until just before the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and remove your hand from the nerves near the temples that move during eating.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is exposed, draw all the blood onto an absorbent sponge, then between the two edges of the wound insert a piece of old cotton, attempting to stitch it with thread.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 then place washed rags soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When it is fractured, you must rub the bone until a callus begins to form, then treat with things that are beneficial for healing, which should be done regularly.
En teil maniere:	 In such a manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophonium, and mix them well.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 And apply it to these wounds regularly to promote healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	And for the eaves by applying warmth from an ear and pouring thereof with oil or other liquids into the ear, and the beneficial properties they are found in the distillations; and then let it become so that li quidem.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 All that drips from the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 either grains, or animals, or stone fragments, or similar things made by man.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 such as seeds that fall from the ground, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 or things that flow out like water and easily, similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it is a stone in the ear or other matter not close to the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see a stone, and it drips any small amount of purple oil or sesame oil, then make an incision to extract.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 And he makes the patient sneeze due to a condition, and blows his nose when sneezing occurs, placing cloth or woolen strips around the ears.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 And extends the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Often comes as a result of this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come to pass, the refined extraction is performed for which follows the method:;
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it comes out with the fine probes, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 If not, then refined extraction is performed using a small double-ended hook.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 And if it still does not come out, then make a grape-sized incision and push the chief of the incision or an opening in the ear with force, and stuff soft wax around the incision so that nothing can enter through the incision.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 Then treat with a strong fire, as often it comes this way as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 And if it does not come in any particular way, then take pitch to which he applies feathers, and uses an instrument as needed for this purpose, placing some cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 Then press the pitch on the stone or whatever it may be, and treat with a strong fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if it does not go out from all the things we have said, then hasten to split the ear as soon as an abscess appears and pus emerges, and spasm occurs.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 And the way of the split is that you first comfort the patient in his headache and then drain the blood according to its strength. Then make him sit between your hands, turning the ear upwards, making a small cut at the base or edge of the ear.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And it is to be torn as with the crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then push according to your strength, and suck in haste into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And perform the healing until it is clean.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if there are grains inside and they swell, then administer an extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it cannot be expelled, then apply a small sucking cups (spatula) subtly according to this form: [Here should be the explanation of the method]
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and perform an incision at the site of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not attempt it when you think that the grain is softened by earwax moisture until you have tried many times.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Then extract it with subtle forceps and the suction cup, as we have said, so that the extractions may succeed.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Therefore if the grain gets into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to cough up phlegm first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let them rest on that same ear where the discharge is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it falls out by itself, this is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 If not so, take many small pieces as per the length of your string or ribbon and scald them in fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 And put the patient's small pin or pincers in his ear, and draw out from it on one side with fingers from another piece of string.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 And continue to do this until all the matter has been extracted piece by piece, and so it will be fully removed.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see this, take a bamboo stick, and insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end in fire until it is properly charred.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 Then make others as mentioned before, so that all has been extracted.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 During the extraction of an animal, if it is a small creature like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on wound care.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 But if it is of large size and can be felt, then make an incision for drainage.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 And this is the easier thing to remove that may be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on drainage and dealing with secretions, if the remedy does not help, it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If there are no worms, if the fine secretions are drained, and they do not appear, take this paste of which is made.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it must be narrowed from below and widened above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And insert the finer tip into the ear according to the amount of pain suffered by the patient, then proceed directly to all parts.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Do this often as long as they are well rested.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not comply with exiting, then plug around the wound with cotton as I have instructed in the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 and if they do not exit as we have said, then administer infusions that the ancients have tested in arrow wound incision, and you will find them or treat with infusitions.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, as shown here: [The following line would typically be accompanied by an illustration in a medical treatise from that time period]
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And [it is] made of silver or copper without small holes, and above openings for distillation.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And [to] press the essence during distillation with an adequately crafted copper instrument for this purpose, and if you see any residue, wrap it around the tip promptly with clean cloth.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then pour in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicine in the jar, and let it be placed in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then put all the residue into the cloth and press with your hand quickly while the oil is still distilling or emerging from the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And let the patient smell it deeply, and be so that the distillation is slightly warmed by fire just as it is distilled in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	And for the eaves by applying warmth from an ear and pouring thereof with oil or other liquids into the ear, and the beneficial properties they are found in the distillations; and then let it become so that li quidem.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without any eyebrows or ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 and this same thing happens in individuals through a wound or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these blockages often do not extend fully into the ear canal if one cannot see them.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 And it never happens that they lose their eyebrows completely, and what they see is fine.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 Therefore, if it comes in but cannot be seen, it requires careful treatment and certain preparations, and when visible, one should place the affected ear towards the sun.
et regarde dedens:	 and examine inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 if you see an obvious obstruction, so that the work involves this spiral structure of which here is the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And it is to pull and incise before and behind completely flat, so that it does not affect the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 If the obstruction is of a bone or body part of the ear, use delicate forceps and gently manipulate it until all pieces are removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if there are obstructions in the ear, take a fine and gentle razor and warm it by fire, then place it on the edge of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel the obstruction and the patient feels great pain in their hearing, pierce it lightly, and ensure that you do not strain the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Then place a tent in the ear according to its width on the perforation, and apply honey with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Do not do this until the wound is healed, then take a tent and apply honey with rosewater ointment, and powder with crushed cobalt.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 If you see an ear flying away, it is necessary to pierce the tent and move another bloody veil with a mold made of rose oil and wax until the swelling subsides.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat until it becomes healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cover with cold water towel, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that are used for treating blood by distillation.
de la char des papieres	From the papers of Char
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This bladder that arises from the hairs when they are wet and dry requires that you stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off a small piece of their roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then pour on white vitriol paste.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if it does not come off, then cauterize with the fine lens-shaped cautery and afterwards apply heat to the incised area.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 and do so many times until nothing remains of their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 And when they are cauterized by fire, their roots are burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	From scurvy
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times come on the skin from the body things that appear gritty in their form and hardness, and so this illness is called "hailstorm," a collection of excessive moisture above and below the skin.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The treatments are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 Take care if "hailstorm" changes from one side and the other, for it is an easy thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Make them then wider apart, then lightly peel each part, and bind with bandages, then wrap.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 If you cannot cover it without piercing the skin a bit, nothing is harmed to the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 And if the tear is large, assemble it with a stitch, and care until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 And if it's small, do not apply any pressure, for the ointments will restore it quickly and prevent scarring.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the splinter descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and extract it with tweezebrushes, hold and press from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 And if the paper is pushed away by the incision, do not worry about it.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 When great frost is removed, wash the wound with salted water and treat the area to heal as quickly as possible until the patient is well again.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exanthema is a grease that appears on cloths and papers above, occurring mainly in children rather than adults, causing great discomfort to their eyes, leading them to have watery mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 And because of this they lie on their faces downward, sleeping with closed eyes and the dampness from their eyelids causing swelling and giving them an appearance covered by exanthema in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press on the place with your hands and feel the exiting between bones.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 The manner of treatment is such that the patient places their head on a pillow.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 And then take a linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that each part contains, then place it on top.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 And press both sides with your hands so that the discharge is gathered within the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 Then make a small incision with a sharp knife to release the fluid, and it should not be larger than the wound made on the vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 And make an opening in front as much as you find discharge.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And in various cases, discharge comes from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Remove it altogether with a whole piece of spotted cloth between your thumb and index finger, and turn your hand to the right and left until scattered.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And ensure that you do not insert it into the tear, that you do not widen the entire swath until the end, and do not break it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if the sinew does not protrude at the beginning of the tear, then gently push the tear until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then extract as we have said, then wet rags and water, and put under the sore, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if it is for men who grind salt and apply it to spoil that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the treatment should be continued until healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes to a hot abscess at the place, then treat with plasters soothing until healed.
des poilz des papieres	From the hairs of parchment papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When hairs grow in paper other than their nature, and are aged, they harm the eyes, and bring about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and scurf, until it is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And there are four methods of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 or by fire caustic alone, or by medicinal ague as instructed in this chapter on fire cautery, and is done either through incision and suturing or with lancets, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 It must be that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it is so positioned, this is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 if not, then place a needle all the way through with thread.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and if it is near the edge of the paper or hair grows from there, draw the thread through to all sides of the paper and turn it as smoothly.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then make at the part below the paper, below the hairs nearest to it, covering all around, from the great forehead down to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then gently press down on the paper with a molding form as a reed basket, and it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity you see raised in the paper which is desired for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if there is an area that requires cutting off a large quantity of paper as it has softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 then make throughout the entire surrounding areas marked by you, and begin from the great forehead down to small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 And there is a split near the natural hair growth of a root, then insert the needle into one of its two corners, and scrape it thoroughly.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then stitch the two lips with a thread made from fine wool using one needle, and let out blood, remove excess threads around both eyelids without any sticky substances, if you do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 And if not, leave the stitching and threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 Then treat the wound without dry or constricting things, as the paper relieves at the discomfort of the wound and its healing, but stitches are moved (as ancient texts say), and this is a work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 And if by another method:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And it is that you shape the paper into a form similar to the willow leaf, as we have described before, at three inches in size according to the following pattern.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply the force.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the piece is not uniform, then take a needle with one thread, and wrap it around the form.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 And add another thread near the large end, and the second thread near the small end, and interweave between them both threads evenly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then lift your hand evenly and remove all the skin over which you have shaped, as we have described before, then stitch together the two edges of the wound with a seam, and care for it until it heals.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 If an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is turned into:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 If it becomes necessary to use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 But the stitching on either side is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of wounds follows this method:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 And that you convert the paper and the fat according to what I have said, then make the stitches with skill, as fine as the width of the skin and the spacing of the suture material.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 And cover as two edges where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 Then join one and the other delicately above what is beneath the skin of the oil, and pull the two stitches from both parts carefully.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And leaves it thus for some days, and the skin that is stretched will die and swell and turn red, as long as it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If there is delay or if the wound has great force, then treat until it becomes healthy again.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 and when the wound heals quickly, and the skin is raised, and no longer can grow hairs;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 this is the form of two tunnels that you will make according to this shape, and in accordance with this length and width;
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 the techniques are such that you should select a fine needle, and put through silk thread soft and thin;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 then join the heads and carefully stitch both together subtly, and make the length of the threads a span long;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 Then order a thin thread of other delicate silk briefly, and do not cut through the main fiber.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then place your hands on the patient's chest near their heart.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And be near the sun so that your work may be declared, as it is a subtle and fine operation, then insert the needle into the entire thread at its root where the hair is attached, and pierce paper hastily while you trace over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then extract the hair down to the root, and insert that hair back into the thread if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then remove your hand while the hair grows through the entire paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the wound is treated and hair does not grow with it, you will scrape the wound at its base along the entire thread as ordered, until the hair grows strongly above the opening and can be seen by oil examination.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Then you will scrape the wound and thread, and cleanse it with oil for two or three days until the hair hardens in place and new growth appears on top.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hair is short, accompany it with long natural eyebrows and elevate them alongside those you leave, until they are sufficiently elongated and then shave them off.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the decay of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this illness known as 'aleacrati' or oil deterioration occurs, there are two ways it happens:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 One natural, the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens from a sudden wound, cutting, or fire cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the manner of treatment for it is that you split the joint capsule, sever its ligaments, and insert linen threads inside, keeping them until they are healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 and one must only use in its treatment things that dry up and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but work with things that soften, like fenugreek.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and the roots of watercress or nettles and flaxseed are cooked, and unguents with quinine melted in any oil, and you wrap it with a cloth, and treat with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the essence of your care is to ensure that it does not shift from its original shape at all.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 And these treatments we have mentioned are solely for addressing this illness, so that it does not return to its original form again.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the gall that comes into the bile
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accident occurs from a wound and tear and cautery and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 And the procedure of the treatment in it is that you take an awl, where it has a double thread, and the needle through the left eyelet to the right, so that the threads come out from two holes on the chest.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then extend the chest above all the awls, and the cover has a wide spacer.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 If the shape of the paper returns as it should, this is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 If not, take the scissors and place them in the tear, then turn the paper and make more tears or cuts within the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 and let the heads of both tears be at the two ends of the incision you made, so that when they are joined together, their shape is like the letter "H".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 then remove the suture, according to the amount of edges that protrude or recede from it, which secure the paper, and bring the two torn parts together, holding them with a thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then follow the healing methods we have mentioned using softening remedangs and bandages until it is sound.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the disease comes from a tear or stitching or cautery, it is proper to make an incision clean through the hairs of the skin, and according to what has been said before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 Then insert between the two sides of a tent, as I have previously stated.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 And the operation must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise devices with all possible means so that it may return to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And the patient themselves, according to what is necessary for operation and adjustments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And for patients accordingly as needed for the treatment and applications of different positions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this suture occurs in the hands such that the paper above is sealed with oil fat, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it must be pierced at the tip of a razor underneath the skin, and lifted upward.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 And you extend the forceps as much as to grasp what is at the subtle spot, neither too hard nor too sharply cutting, so that the patient cannot endure if the spot becomes too hard or dulls the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 And make your incision, carefully excising that gathered tissue, so it returns to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 And cleanse all the gathered tissue, and do not moisten it with dirty water or lift with hot water or charcoal.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then place a tent of flax between the tissue and oil, and cover the wound generously with soft wool.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days wash with soap and other soothing substances until it is clean.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the egg
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 It is said that the gout occurs in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 It is said that the gout occurs in two ways: one that resembles nerve and gangrene hard skin, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen moisture blisters. When touched with iron and cooked at the edge of the pincers, it cannot move;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 And both types begin near the great forehead and grow slowly until they cover all sight and light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the method of incision is such that the patient places his head on a support, then operates with the needles.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and lift paper to your hand, then twist the gout by small winding, and extend it upwards;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take a needle and apply hair from a horse, or wolf, or ox, and strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 Then slightly sharpen the needle's tip and insert it under the nail, piercing entirely through. Bind the nail with a strong thread, extending above the skin along the edge of the nail that emerges at the root to all the hair, then cut off any remaining part in the area where the spatula is applied gently and with slight force, leaving the natural color or layer intact so that through the incision no tears come as usual.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 And do not extend the nail too much beyond the knuckle only to the hair and thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then peel off all the surrounding skin from which lies its shape.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the flesh does not touch or break it and that the puncture is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And after making an incision, pour some pearl broth into it and the dressing made of lead, and leave it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the nail is not alive and you cannot insert the needle, and the knuckles do not enter it, this resembling of a nail has often been treated with remedies.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 and grow as I have described in the section, and if you see it swell up, treat the patient's affliction with oil, and take a light amount of flesh broth according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason is nearing, then distill from your mouth into an oil collier made of litargire and with red wool thread mixed in, and stuff the oil until the following day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Then continue the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil is against you as an abscess appears, then apply it, and first treat the hot abscess until it heals, then resume the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the flesh by the elbow hurts in the oil with great harm, then suspend it on a splint and bandage part but not all, to prevent blood from flowing.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then distill into the red wool thread oil made of litarg지리아.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the cross placed over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 Some people experience a redness once and cover the swelling and restrain with paper strips and then turn them back on the following day, resembling an almond blossom.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 And the operations are such that the patient places his head on a stool, then works with his eyes, and wraps all of it with bandages suitable for this purpose, and holds them firmly.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 Then cut the first bandage, and trim it close to the skin with scissors until finished, ensuring not to irritate the wound.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 And make the incisions of spermatic veins as we have described in the incision of nails and small bandages from which it is removed, as shown by the form after this treatise.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 And once the incisions are completed and all bandages removed, apply oil of seal butter or distill it with red wineskin and similar corrosive medicines, and cover the area with clean cotton soaked in olive oil if a hot abscess is assured.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 If it remains in place for a time, and the bile rises again, and you suspect an abscess is hot, leave the wound alone and treat the abscess with soothing measures.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work as soon as it is healed, and thus make the wound where the joint was dislocated by this similar condition.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 However, you must always align the treatment of each weak part along its natural course;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 and from an unnatural cause, in surgical work;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 and do not proceed with your hand in any of these procedures until you see that the patient has recovered from this specific operation.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red swellings are covered over on the skin, and they impair its function and weaken the eye daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 It is necessary, then, when you look at the first joint that is affected, where it is located, is flaccid, and there is no other illness but in the tendon.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then you must fix it thusly:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Command the patient to place his head in your lap, then tie off those veins along their entire length according to your wisdom, and let them be finely cut in a manner as follows:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two screws placed by degrees within one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 Then carefully cut the veins gently, and let the blood flow out after each one, until you see that all veins are removed from the area.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And ensure that you do not parch the tips of the spatulums, and perform this procedure in the middle of the day before the sun, being very careful with your work so as to avoid cutting any veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And once you have done this, if there is any residue in the neck, pour a mixture of green and red color to dissolve what remains on his throat.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you are unable to grasp all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster with soothing substances for eye pain and leave it on until the pain is eased and assured against inflammation, then continue according to this method before they are healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And here is the form of remedy:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The mirror known as "arisati" abscesses:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you treat it with cauterization and by using the hot ague medicine as I have previously described, but if it is not healed, then perform a trick in which you cut into the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that remains until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 When the bone is exposed, and you see decay and darkness, remove all instruments from the entire tool that bears form.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And it is called "sharp edge," and made of iron at the front corner, and pointed like a file as in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And place it on the location of the decayed bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand until you know that the decay has been removed.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 and do this not once but often, then restore the location of healing remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 if the wound is swollen and discharging pus, and the body of the bowel is also swoln, remaining so for forty days, and it does not heal or become an abscess, considering there are no other issues, know that it is healthy;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If not, there is no other remedy but to bring back the abscess to its place on the upper thigh as per this method:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And it is that you expose the bone again with iron, and with medicinal agues, and when it has been exposed, take an auger as per this method, and let the shoulder blade be of iron in three angles, and the shaft to be tapered up to where you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then place it against the bone near the temple, and keep your hand away from the iron plug, then turn the auger completely until it penetrates the bone, ensuring that the patient feels as if they are holding their hand on their neck.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And then restore the original place with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the wound heals and hardens, go to the neck.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 It is a more pleasant thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the vein
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 If the eyes are opened widely throughout, and there is no disturbance or narrowing in the nose, then you should tie the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then treat the throat, then apply cupping or using a hat-like object to suck without causing harm, then apply an oil made of acacia and aloe, as well as incense and sarcocolous resin, and strain the oil, and place bandages and linens.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 and the manner of using linens is that you should take enough soft linens, doubling each one four times, then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed by the eyes.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then strain from above a hard bandage, and begin again with leeches to suck without causing pain.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then remove the leeches and let the limb be strained day and night, if it becomes softer, then extract it much.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the limb returning to normal, that's good.
se ce non;	 If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Resume the enema and dressings and bandage and leeches until it is healthy again.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The rupture of tissue seen
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When dislocations come in the open wound, and paper is coming out as like sawdust of pitch, and it's hopeful to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Then when you see it swollen, the operation is such that you insert a needle to the root of the part from below up to its tip, then insert another needle or if there are two threads in the part above the rim.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 and pierce it precisely, leaving the first needle according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then cut the second thread and tie a part of the eyelid around it, and tighten it well, then extract the needle and place a greased cloth in abundance over it.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 and leave until the threads come out with the eyelid, then treat the eye comfortably as long as the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and never restrict the wound with any part of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the eyes have a large appearance, then pierce at the delicate part that comes from the edge of the eye, and let the moisture run white and draw down the hairs, entering almost immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then extract until it is clean.
de la bowe de l’oil	And if the vessel to be removed completely.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease called "alcunatia" is not just an arrow that has been assembled in the eye and appears to be water running down, it is not actually water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 and the manner of its appearance in surgery is that you make the patient sit on a seat prepared and upright, then take their head with both hands, and move it as soon as you see the arrow coming above the eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then it is to be firmly fixed, and does not descend or become dislodged, allowing the patient to see things as they should.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 and if it does not descend, let the patient know that this is acute, and ensure that the bowels are arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 If the patient lies down between your hands, then take a subtle ointment and rub it on the thickened skin near the horny membrane, along its continuation with the horny membrane and crown, until relief.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it is resolved, if you distill in the warm oil mixed with honey or water and fenugreek boiled and honey, then be treated with another remedy until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Of waters in the ear
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have found similarities to waters in their separation, and what is required for piercing.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 If, in practice according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 It is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and oil him with holy oil and hold firmly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if his eyes are on the right, or in your right hand if his eyes are on the left.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almandine," or in your left hand if his eyes are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 then place the tip of the instrument near the crown through a slit as wide as a ray in that corner of the oil at the lower part of the orbit, and insert the instrument called "almandine" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces into the hole of the oil, feeling that almandine enters the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 And it is proper that the measure of the Almagdala way be at the front of the measurement of the space from the elbow to the end of the finger.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 and this is the crown of the oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 If you see the bone on that paper due to the whiteness of the tissue, then place the instrument there where the blood is, and express it along another vein afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the water now flows out, see the patient before you and the instrument in its place.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After resting for a bit, and the blood returns through the second vein, apply pressure with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not move upward, gently twist Almagdala lightly with your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 Then place some alum in the blood, and leave this oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert a stopper or linen soaked in oil rosary and abundant with egg white, and seal it with the clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 And those of our time, place on a small compress generously with egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as some people have very hard nails, you must use an instrument called "albert," of which this is the shape.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And pierce therefore only the joint, not too deeply, but make it slightly underneath, then apply an amalgam as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And for the completion of the work, position the patient lying down on their back in such a place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 And they should be immobilized from all movements, and give them light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left, and make them rest according to their condition until the next day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 Then remove them to the same dark room and test their vision, let them see various things, and then rejoin the limb until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And it is not necessary to do this at the time of treatment or after incision now, but you must elevate it because the swelling rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 When an abscess forms quickly, remove it within seven days, and apply the remedy of that which heals the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it is calmed, remove the dressing and apply something on its face to cover for a day, and let it remain in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 Then gradually leave the house little by little, and return to normal activities.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And understand that no interference should occur in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one came to us from Yrach, who said that we are at peace and making something called almagda perciet, through which water is produced, but I have never seen any in our land nor read of it in the books of old.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are similar to forms of alchemy, because those who do not know them regard them as such.
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they truly are:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of these has three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot onto the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 At no time are various dislocations born or come to be, of which some appear like scorpions ready to sting.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 and if they have such characteristics where there is fiery redness or they are pale of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 In the case of such dislocations that are pale and not fiery red, it is proper to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 and blow through his nostrils, and pour oil into those dislocations, and massage firmly.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 then do as you can to support the subtle point at the tip of one finger, until you know that dislocation is entirely bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if anything remains which cannot be covered, apply all possible ointments gently, ensuring nothing is left.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 And if it does not rise on its own or an abscess forms, then apply a compress as needed.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if it is with malign abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the wound is closed and all edges are smoothed, then pour oil or vinegar followed by water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If there is no effect, and moisture reaches the throat, ensure it is safe.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 And if moisture does not penetrate as needed, ensure there is no swelling in the bone above it, where inflammation does not occur for cutting:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then you must wrap it with a slightly thick thread of flax and soak it in our hands, leaving enough space between each piece.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 And place the patient's head with its neck as straight as possible, and turn it gently until it can be seen inside the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And many times this is done on children at schools, and it is an easy task for those who wish to do so.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then take the head that comes through the neck with one hand and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and examine each in turn like we who are his sons.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this as long as you know that the children have violated that vessel, then draw out the child, evacuate the blood, and wipe the head with Egyptian salve, and return it to its place as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do this for three days or more, until the ointments have dissolved everything that remains.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 Then afterward put in a gauze bandage for several days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying remedies, then apply them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 This is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, into which oils and medicines are poured.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it is made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a cauldron, and you conduct in the same way.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And if you see it, make a closed cauldron, and fill it with plain emollients to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And let there be an attachment atop for holding while heating the oil or liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot onto the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Many times there appears on the neck a disease called "telloul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And therefore you must begin by cutting out (the affected area), and then apply a strong incision with either the hot caustic or a burning medication.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if you do not remove it while it is still small, take care to observe if when grown they are hard, of strange color, and poor in sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 If it is not touched with iron as it is an inflamed abscess, because whenever one cuts into it once, the patient suffers great harm.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 And if the abscess is of a burning touch, not of strange color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then drain the patient without fear, and cut away any dry or constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut into pieces and removed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Believes that when a solution of continuous bleeding occurs in any of these delicate bones, it benefits little, for some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 Then it is necessary when this happens to anyone, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then sew the two sides together and treat until it is sound again.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 And if the sides are separated on both parts, it is necessary to scrape all areas of their core until they heal, then join the two sides with a stitch, bind them tightly, and powder the blood of a dragon, and use incense ashes.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place a piece of emplastron on it from strong or other emplastron that draws, and leave it until pus comes out through it, then treat with ointment until it is sound again.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The manner of suturing involves this: assemble the dressing.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or by needles, as we have said in stitching the abdomen;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have previously informed you.
des apostemes des levres	In treating lip abscesses.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 The hands often produce hardened abscesses resembling small pebbles, varying in size from smaller to larger ones;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 Then it is necessary that you return the abscesses and split them under each one, and grasp them with forceps and divide into each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 then place the body after trepanation of an abscess so that it is sutured closed;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and then cleanse the wound, and treat the body until it is healed dry.
de la char des gencives	From the charring of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Many times it appears above the gums dislocated, which the ancients called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 If it is necessary to support it with tongs, cut at its root, and let the vein or blood flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 Then apply mercury vitriol powder, or other binding and drying agents to it.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 And if after the incision it returns repeatedly, and often happens, then re-cut and cauterize again:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 If it does not return after the cauterization.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 And these are the methods for healing.
des sordens	From soreness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Never gathered at the heads of teeth, between the gums, rough scales that are ugly and sharp.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And never become black or yellowish-green with worms until the infection reaches the gums, and they start to smell.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 If it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your holy hand, and raise any lumps or scrapes found, until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And thus do the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other discolorations, until they are healed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 And if you remove what is at the first cause, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, resume on the second day and third, until all is removed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 Know that the teeth require various forms of dressings to heal, according to what the work shows, because the scrapers from which one removes between the teeth have other shapes than those removed between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 Et ces formes et autres encore sont avec toi préparées.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary when you treat a toothache that you delay the drilling as much as possible, for it should not be done hastily.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 because this is a matter of great importance up to such an extent that there can be no excuse for the extraction.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is suffering from strained teats, one must be certain of the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Often the pain plagues the patient, and he believes it to be a healthy tooth, but drills the bad one.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 and in any case, the pain does not leave until the evil cause is removed, as we have already tried this with these healers.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the entire tooth until the gum is thoroughly protected from all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then move it to your elbows or use subtle tenailess movements at first and then gradually, until it is well aligned, after which you firmly secure the tenails.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And let the head be painful in your holy space between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth properly and breaking it, if it does not come out easily, take any of these substances and apply them within each piece gently; then move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 And if the tooth is pierced or dislodged, then you should fill it with cloths where the gaps are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 and if it is pulled out subtly with tenailess movements, that it does not break while being extracted.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And it is important to work gently near the gums to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And ensure that it is not broken and a part remains; returning to the patient with greater pain due to the root's evil nature.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And be sure that you do not act as the unlearned barber does, who through their hastiness and boldness break the jaw many times, without providing any of what we have mentioned.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 But bring about any relief through the application of a poultice for this great disease by addressing the roots that reside there, or from the carriage they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 And when the tooth is torn out, wash the wound with wine or olive oil and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 If bleeding occurs as often happens, apply the poultice of powdered antimony to the wound.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And if it does not heal, then you should cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The forms of the teeth that first erupt are with sharp points and large roots, which should not be doubled when extracting the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	 And these are the types:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of large teeth such that they do not bend while pulling, and be well-crafted of iron, and have teeth to grip when pulled.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the spine
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the roots remain during extraction, it is proper that you place cotton soaked in oil on the wound for one or two days until the area is smoothed over, then insert the instruments called "algofri," which make the head of the shoulder appear as if a bird's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 And made hollow as a file, and it is shaped thus:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not pass through all these pins, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali" (a splint), which resembles a staff:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And be thick enough so that it does not break, and if the root sprouts from this place, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If not, assist with all possible means by which shapes can come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument with two tongs, the form it creates is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools in front of him for teeth, and from this instrument that looks like large pincers, the form it takes is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And these supports must be strong so that they cannot break, and know there are many of dense support.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 And likewise other supports, which are not counted:
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the wise master subtly uses his instrument by himself according to his practices and the diseases he demonstrates, because there are partial ailments or ancient teachings did not show instruments for variety of causes; so it does not break at all on the cart or other bones, or elsewhere where it protrudes. Seek the supports that should be used as I have told you, and assist with gestures such that this shape occurs:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And they are large and well held to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore it to its place with suitable remedies for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, that the patient has all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the visible teeth do not follow the natural course of the body, and their shape is unattractive, especially in maidens, it must be known if the tooth root has been removed after the tooth, and it is not naturally placed on the right side, and cannot be pulled or filed down.
adonques lou raie;	 Then cut off;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 And if it is adhered with the tooth, take this instrument of which here is the shape, and it resembles a small beak, and is made of iron inwardly sharpened.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	Et place the coping piece by piece over time due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file the coping so that its shape resembles this.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is as with the limb of which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 and in a similar manner to the bone from which nails are formed, and it is gently wound up little by little over several days so that it does not move until it sets.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 then the surface is completely smoothed at the end without any roughness, and if its density is too severe and it blunts the tongue, then you must file the sharp edges so that they are even, ensuring that it neither blunts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	Whenever the tooth chips
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the tooth is loosened either by impact or falling out, and the patient cannot apply pressure under what they bite that it does not fall out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but this is ineffective.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 If necessary, constrain with a thread of gold, for silver threads turn green and rust, but gold does not move ever.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the points.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you see the points aligned, take the thread and loop it twice between the two healthy points, then place the knot between the points until you reach another healthy point on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then resume coverage up to the part where you began, and gently yet skillfully pull your hand back until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And keep the ligature close to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then wrap the head of the bone with iron wire using pliers, and join them, and position them so they do not touch the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then let it remain tight as long as possible, and if it loosens or the wires break, restrain them with another wire.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 If it remains and functions in this manner throughout its strength, and it is the form of the jawbones and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two replacements as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when a tooth falls out, reset it back in its place, freshly each time, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And do not involve anyone who is wise and compassionate, nor at any time shape it as a tooth from an ox bone, but place it where the deficiency is, restrain it as we have said, and it will last and serve for long periods.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	:  And so, they should be ong-pie if the w such that heal;
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 At no time does this injury occur from below the tongue or throat, as is commonly found.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 or by accident of a swiftly cut wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 Et les opérations sont telles que vous agissez sur la bouche du malade, et assurez-vous que sa tête soit stable, et élèvez sa langue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 Ensuite, coupez le nerf facial, tant que la langue soit délogée de son état normal, et s'il y a desdouces ou des noeuds, c'est une plaie profonde, alors introduisez l’unciné et coupez soigneusement.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 Et assurez-vous que la déchirure ne soit pas trop étroite près de là où l'artère se trouve.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 Et après cela, soulevez la langue rougeâtre et molle, ou froide, puis insérez sous la langue un tampon en lin.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And let the lice bite the patient every night so that his joints cannot settle.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 If bleeding occurs, then apply vinegar-soaked lead over it.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 If the blood does not stop, then cauterize with a long-burning cautery, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 Then apply another treatment until it becomes healthy again.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 And if you see that it is of a different color or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 And if it is decaying and swollen with moisture, then apply the oncinic bandage, which has a subtle odor, and release from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if the bleeding does not stop at your work, then apply sulfur paste until it becomes firm, and return to your work as long as you have treated everything.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then raise the limb with ease and skill, and treat other injuries as needed until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	by sore lese ire ou d’or is a l’in such as both, that et cure it even, and your own teisso; and m both est and the e is the lier. And so and of and swell too much leu si on les de la testee is and s and then oint eau or they are treated with salt and reactions and a tu heal of to l’est et les, and if themes; and both lese est, and the cure;
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Never does the condition of swollen throat occur which is called 'godath,' and these are properly referred to as two almonds; when treating them, as we have explained in the section, if they do not heal, be cautious.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If it is an abscess that's small and has a flat color, don't probe with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is large, also don't probe with iron for the bleeding.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 but let it remain until it's matured, and then you shall divide it, or it may break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 If it is of pale red color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument for coping, but first examine if the abscesses rest and are soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then have the patient sit in front of the sun with their eyes shut and mouth open, as you work on them, gripping their temples between your hands, and press their tongue out from under all instruments so that it takes shape.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 and be of silver or fine iron just like a razor blade:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 You should be pressing the tongue against all this instrument and observe the abscess. Take the needle and insert it into its core, pulling fluid out as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And treat any wound with cloths, then apply the bandage using an instrument of which this shape seems like a force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And thusly the head is bent, with one side higher than the other, and it's very painful, made of iron or bandage.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And it has a sharp edge on one side and no name on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have bandaged one of the almonds (referring to parts of the body or perhaps metap#160metaphors), then bandage the other in the same manner. After making an incision, gargle the patient with warm water and saltwater for ease; if bleeding occurs, continue gargling with warm water until the bleeding stops. Alternatively, use juice from cooked pomegranates or crushed myrtle leaves.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat until it becomes healthy again;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And no other abscesses appear in the throat except for two almonds, if they occur as such like the two almonds themselves.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, which is to say, one small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and had closed off the entire throat so well that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she stayed like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swoln that it had been pushed through both nostrils by the two openings of the small one.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 So I did so immediately, and inserted an ivy cone therein, then the thread was pulled through, and a great portion of wax came out.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then rejoin it on the other side through the nostrils, and open the mouth and compress the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 After inserting the needle into the abscesses, and taking some material from it, but did not obtain much blood.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And thus they dilated the woman's throat passage, and began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop trying to remove that abscess for long periods of time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 And the abscesses returned again and filled up with what I had emptied from them until they became quite large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Then I deceived him and cauterized inside his throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	 So he stopped growing.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And from these parts, and only God did anything to him afterwards.
de l’uve	them. 7-30.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When they attempt to return it to its place, and it is inflamed and long, then call it "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is very large and round, then call it an "eyeball".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it is treated as we have described in the section, and the treatment yields no benefit, and you see that the abscess has calmed down but is subtle, then it must be excised.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And those that are round and not elongated.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And if it is of blood or fishy color or blackish, then one should avoid making an incision in it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Therefore, when you see it as I have described regarding its appearance and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we previously mentioned.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then insert the needle into the vein, withdraw it slightly, and follow the procedure for two small incisions as previously mentioned for incision of the stones.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And it is necessary that you do not fill more than what lies beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 for if you fill too much, it causes pain to the voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and after the incision, follow what we have said in the incision of the stones, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears being covered, then you must apply an instrument for the reassurance of the cover.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of this cautery is acute ague.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument as we have said in the fire cautery treatise, and rinse with lively fresh water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And with this instrument, here is its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And it has a handle or hollow where the medicine is placed, like the handles of a spoon, and places the instrument with all the medicine under the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth containing the medicine inside, ensuring it does not descend to the throat and belly.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 then hold your hand with all the medicine and press it against the eye, a quantity about half an hour's worth, until you see movement easing and the bitterness of the medicine is soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 and if you see this, take some cotton and wrap it around any instrument, dampen the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument onto all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton becomes moist on the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And often do this until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry, and falls off after IV or V days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you need to repeat the medicinal caustication, upon repeating it, and after caustication around the eye, use a cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is surrounding the medicinal area.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And be raised from cold water, and be healed by gargling until it feels normal again.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This treatment is more about the incision, not just the caustication.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamine and wormwood and origanum (oregano) and rue (herb), and chamomile and avronne (horseradish) and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of these into a pot, set it to ease, and make boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And let the bone be well fixed with strong clay, and within the hole have an instrument fitted according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And be it of silver or iron, and let one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapors rise to the eye through the canal, until the vein is constricted.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 after its recurrence often, until the vein dries, and ensure that you do not touch it at the beginning of the emergence of the hot abscess, for many things can happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 and do not touch it when it is in the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this instrument is not present, take a canal and put in its head an eagle's feather so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 For the crack of a tooth does not greatly affect the breathing through the mouth, and it is good healing together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Often, one may feel something in the throat or spine of a fish, or anything else.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 Therefore, if it is necessary to examine what you can see, and press the tongue to the sunlight along the entire instrument, so that you may observe any movement.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And what does not open and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit at this point as well, so that the meat may be cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 In case the thing has been expelled through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of thread, or a lettuce root, or crust from dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 And tie it to the sponge or thread, and then swallow it again.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 And when it reaches the stomach, if it dissolves, then drain the fluid;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 And if it does not come out as we have said, then take a tool of bone as described here:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And raise the instrument's handle so it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised high.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so it does not close, nor insert the bone too deeply.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 And to move it means the patient touches the instrument, because it is out of place or unnatural.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If desired, where he traces with all instruments evenly until firm.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of throat constriction
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 Never is there a treatment without suction, as I have said in the section, through medical treatments;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see stiffness, treat it entirely with small pincers or delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that is not effective, then take a hollow reed, and put it into the patient's throat, and repeatedly perform warm compresses with the heated iron rod, as often as necessary.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if you give the patient water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then take full sip of cold water and work the mouth, and it produces the urge to swallow, and often moves with its hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And as soon as suction feels the water, it flows.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with strong onion using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times, for it will burn very sore.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the manner of fumigation is that you shall have a pot with coal embers in it, and place under a cloth sieve through which the head should be inserted using the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 Then pour your fumes, and the patient puts their head in a container with their mouth closed so that no smoke enters but reaches up to the eyes.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 And now the eye will begin to burn, and if it does not come out, restart the fumigamination many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 And sufferers experience thirst, and consume salted and sour things, and do not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 Then it becomes necessary for him to be released under this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the form of the instrument with which one treats swelling is, when it can be seen, similar to crooked tongs designed for entering into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 and it resembles the beak of a physician's tool, and there is roughness of lime, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	 and so this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The form of the instrument that looks like it must not be swallowed. And here is a healer, and here.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 There are many forms of abscesses, as the memory comes to this and that in this book, and they differ between perforation and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And there are two ways of which one is as it appears itself, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is for boils which occur within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For an abscess in the head is different from that at the base, and an abscess of the shoulder blade is different from those occurring in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And if at an abscess we should not pierce, until the bowel is fully matured according to its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 and if of such that it must be pierced when they are ripe, do not die according to their completion, as abscesses which are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When an abscess occurs near the joints and is left to rot therein, on occasion it may be so that the tissue and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 Or if an abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay the piercing until it is matured, harm will come to the main limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 or if it is near the base, then one should pierce as soon as it is matured.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 and it should not be pierced without completed digestion, except for those near the base, that it may not burst forth too quickly, extend inwardly, and become a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 And cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And it is necessary that you know the time of abscess perforation when healing progresses, and when pain eases, departure of fever, diminution of swelling and redness, and faint debates and sharpening of the abscess head, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And it is necessary to wait for some time after the perforation or as long as needed from the abscess site, and where movement occurs.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And the perforation should be long in duration for the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or at joints and veins, and at arteries, in all cases where there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 When they swell, according to which limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in the churned flesh, you must allow the opening to remain until it is fully healed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 If you pierce it before this spot, there is venom running through his body, and it is filled with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And sometimes the lips harden and the deepest parts of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And for any abscess that you perceive according to the width of its body, as befits the limb it is in.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 And it is necessary for you to treat small abscesses and small wounds.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many ruptures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 and if with such abscesses it is necessary to cut the flesh, and cover them up.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 when they become just like rags, and are moldy, then it must be done as with barrels.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 and if there are those that are split into three corners, and if so with such as are covered like the bellows of mire, like hookworms.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if there are such places where one makes a round incision, or other cuts and similar injuries.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 For those without heads, as with superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them straight through;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 and when the abscess is large, with great swelling, and you pierce it, do not drain all of the pus in that hour, but rather a part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 then probe the abscess until the next day, and then fully drain it.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 do this repeatedly, gradually more each time, until all of the swelling subsides.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 especially if the patient is weak in vigor, or a woman carrying, or small children, or elderly and infirm men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the arrow can sometimes leap out with the release of the bowstring, and inadvertently kill the patient, so be cautious.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Discharge this chapter with great care, and when you have detected your abscess, drain the wound, and examine if the wound from the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 And if it is a neatly sized one, then dress with either linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 And if it is large abscesses and there are many outgrowths, then one should dress each with a bandage so they may come into contact with each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 And if you have cut into the abscess near the skin, and removed it entirely, then fill it with old cotton or flax cloth without moisture, and bind until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then consult a doctor, and apply ointment as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 If bleeding occurs on your wound, treat with cold water and ease, and moist cloth, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 If the bleeding persists, if it is well-managed and cared for, and the powders I have mentioned in this book are used, and if it is winter or when the affected area or abscess is very inflamed, then you must apply warm woolen tents and linens soaked in wine and hot oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 If it is summer and the affected area or wound is fleshly, then you must apply warm linens soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then release the abscess and drain it, and treat it as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 This must be known universally in treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 Or I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of pus-filled collections.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses arise in the scalp, they are handled as silk, similar to the follicles of a girl's hair, and there are many like this.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are those that are greasy and sticky like hairs.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And if there are such things that are hard and thorny at the tail, then there is no doubt as long as the arrow does not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the techniques of bandaging are such that you must try with all instruments called 'entromissors', from which formations come afterwards and what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, it grows above the long one. (This could refer to a growth or formation that occurs when there is an excess of moisture.)
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave nothing behind.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 Then dip a piece of cotton in Egyptian salve if available.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 If not, use water and salt, and apply the balm to the wound, leaving it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And thus will run those who are displaced during the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And then begin the wrapping again, as before, on the second day and third, until you are certain that it does not dislocate at night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wound with ointment as suitable for him, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if an abscess persists, then apply this according to this form, in the long manner;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and collect thy pus, and scrape away all scabs, and apply your healing treatment to the sore as it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the arrow causes him pain in return, do what I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat an abscess if it is pus-filled, and with scraping and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the treatment of a pus-filled abscess and its moisture is easier, for it contains less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if any of these abscesses or heads without moisture are present, and those old-fashioned ones that I have described at the head.
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found the abscess like a hard stone, sharp and bruised, which could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 But if one had hit it with anything, they would have made a wound like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses coming or at the top, such as those that come from the top of children's heads and rooting in their ears, open it daily near the most dependent point, so that pus may exit.
et les cure si com il covient.	 and treat them as needed.
des scrophules	Of scrofulous tumors
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and from under the shoulders, and in the armpits, and never come to any other place or body parts, and they are very much, and closely connected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And each scrofula properly forms within its quarter, like the knot and the top abscess, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others that hold malicious intentions which do not wish to obey healthiness.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 in that one then which you see of good bodily arrangement at the touch, and is similar to the color of the body overall, and moves from all sides and not so loose on the skin nor veins nor arteries or vessels, and it's not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 If it is necessary to treat it from above, and peel off each part, extend the two lips double the thickness of the nail, if needed, as we have said in head sores.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 And move it little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, nor is it necessary to remove the spatula or cutting tool, lest the hand slips and does too much before you need to stop when necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not bleed, place vitriol paste in the wound, or any powders that coagulate blood, and bind the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 and let it rest until the sore is soothed, and made softened, and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the blood is stopped, return to your work until you have completed it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then go back to your proper course if there are small tumors remaining after some time; treat and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if the blood vessel at the root of a tumor is large, do not just excise that tumor at its base but instead tie it with strong double thread and let it hang without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then dress the wound with well-boiled cotton soaked in Egyptian salve, then bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you completely remove the scrofula, it is necessary to bring together the two edges of the wound and hold them closed now, so that there is no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And it is necessary for you to bind up the root and drain pus, and close as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 For tumors that cause excess, puncture where they come to an end;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and do the same as previously described, then clean it with salve and other similar things if there is decay present.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is thoroughly cleaned, apply a poultice of soaking oil until it heals.
de squinance	If you are treated by applying a tissues to ensure there's no longer remains of any dead tissue, then as we had said previously mentioned, so forth; and when the wound with substances so is that healing ointment and other until it properly cleaned becomes cured.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients spoke and wrote about throat surgery.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 But I have never seen it done in our land, and it is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those with stridor, it is necessary to clear out the incision in the throat called "epiglottis".
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And no aid is provided through this method because all the veins and the evil humors of the body are found in those with abscesses burning hotly within the mouth, throat or arms.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main source, it is necessary to remove the epiglote to avoid destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should make an incision just above or below three circles or four from one side as a small slit lengthwise between two circles or along the quantity of the fissure, but not into the trachea.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 And those who are so sore have their section of the epiglottis performed where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched with skin from the throat to its full length, then cut the flesh until reaching the windpipe.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing else, then close the sac as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 and demonstrated by the section of the windpipe vein that tears apart when it is ruptured where the voice fails.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 and leave the open wound exposed for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when there is doubt about strangulation after some time has passed, gather the two lips of the wound in the throat area and suture all together until the cartilage is felt.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer medicines that generate heat, until it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	the uzerd: and  (or they:s.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Then place a covering over the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 and so they instruct the patient to leave the wound open until the illness is gone, which takes 3 or 4 days; then they command it be sewn shut and treated, until healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw a maiden take a knife and plunge it into her throat, cutting part of the tongue.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And so they called me to heal her, finding her almost dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and found that blood had come from it; however, she hadn't bitten a vein or other tissue, just her throat, and the blood flow was coming through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I addressed it quickly, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 and nothing of this occurred to the lady except that her voice turned red, and she recovered afterward into her own condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 for I tell you that in treating the epiglottis there is no need to fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses the color of jet black, and occur mostly in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 and there are two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	 natural, and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 or naturally, it has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And the accidental one is in two ways: one seems like fat to us, and the other way it resembles an abscess that comes from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 When there is fear, and it does not matter to work on external things except in that which is small, and test and search for everything involved.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 If you find it as we have learned, and do not apply to any vein, if the bandage is applied as one would bind wounds, and treat the entire area, if there are points.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And search thoroughly, and heal it as necessary, until it is perfectly well again.
des nous	And let us know.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 There are many ways to us, of which I will say all the variations;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 And here I must explain all the differences between them and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that dislocation is accompanied by heat and fever until the boiling has passed, and tissue destruction is complete.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 Then rests the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With ours there is no heat or fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and according to the body's color, beginning like glass and becoming larger.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And they follow II similarities, or grease, or moisture, and the colors are as I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the care of us that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermitted", according to its form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the method of inquiring about abscesses in us is that you extract or find more moisture than you see in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the discharge has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then extract the intramedullary bone, and take care so it does not break.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If there is a running discharge through the skin, if its color matches what I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And if there is no discharge after extracting the intramedullary bone, it indicates fatty tissue, then cut accordingly in a cross pattern, and grasp with forceps, and lightly scrape from each side, and cover the cloth where it lies to treat it cleanly with needlework.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot treat it cleanly, then cut in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 Because if anything remains, it will return to you many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if it remains a bit and does not bother you, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and put in soothing substances to treat other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if they are large, cut the two edges of the wound, and treat as though burned by a hot liquid.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the burn from scraping is opposite or different, quickly apply the lead of antimony paste, and let it rest for two days or three, until the wound heals, and allow time for blood to replenish.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to using what was previously left out because of this.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 See here the forms of interposed suppurations, and there are three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	 large, medium, and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And among them are three types called "albarata", one type is called "rebebo," and there are three kinds.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, means, small, to search for abscesses of a fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and they are like needles with which one pierces the sorcery, made of citrine stone, iron or silver, whose movement is valued as that which is yellow, and more tested for searching blisters of a fistula by black bumps.
et sont de III manieres:	 and they are in three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The forms of tumors are mostly similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and for tumors that have two blisters in three ways also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and for tumors that have three blisternails are found under the skin. They resemble small lumps or pimples in different sizes according to the size of their openings. There are large, medium, and small vari
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And if there are knots with two horns, and knots of one horn only, and they come in three kinds.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 And all these are necessary at their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The head of these that are sharp is cutting, and some do not cut other than one side, from which we scrape the skin, so the vein nor nerve is severed.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 and these intruders are reset in layers, so that the patient does not suffer at the onset of boils.
et sont de III manieres:	 And they come in three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 And they are not used anywhere else but in the joints of legs and arms, breasts, shoulders, and similar areas.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 And at no other time is another instrument made small, resembling the sharpened sticks of lancets, according to this method, which punctures blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed at no time back into its proper position of veins and arteries, and does not return according to this grand form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 At no time do the breasts of any man swell when he begins to be corrupted, until they resemble a woman's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 and remain ugly and swolled, and those who wish to treat them must do so according to this method of the treatment line; b. until g: (The latter part seems incomplete or unclear in Old French, possibly referring to a specific section or page number.)
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with cleaning clay, then stitch together the two edges of the wound by sewing, and let it heal until it is healthy.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And if it inclines forward, becoming weakened due to its size like it often occurs in women, causing pain in the ribs above, by two similar tears.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 For this is why one hangs from the other at each end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. up to line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and prepare what we have mentioned of stitching and powders, as well as everything necessary for the treatment, until it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 And if it is not clean or the incision isn't fully made because the patient doesn't want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a cloth of compressed cotton in a corrosive salve.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And he leaves it to settle until it reattaches and absorbs fat, then treats it so that it becomes clean.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses and fractures of the arms and legs
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from the limbs are hard sores or ulcers, and some that contain pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those which contain moisture must be cut following this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	an:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to hard tumors, treat them as we have described in cutting open hard tumors, and if the wound reopens, prepare the fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	For rupturing of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the vein is torn and the skin is sutured on top of it, often there are many abscesses, and similarly, blood vessels bleed and become infected.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if the cone is placed in this way for the artery, then the abscesses are large at their origin;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you touch it on your elbebows, it feels extremely painful.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 and if it is for the vein, then there are often visible bulges appearing;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 It is foolish to try and cover this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the nails and joints and where there are many other openings, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore it is necessary to remove the iron bandage, and those who are at the neck must also have it removed, and in those with swelling of arteries above the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 then work on the tonsils, and carefully release the vessel from the sutures, until it is fully exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 then insert a needle from underneath it and pierce through to the other side, and secure the vessel with a double thread in two loops, as I have shown you during the extraction of the two vessels located in the temple.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 then make a hole between the two loops with an introducer until no blood flows from it, and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 Then apply a bandage to reduce swelling until it subsides.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And if an abscess is due to the size of the vein, it must be treated with ointment that you can apply to all over the affected skin, then insert the needle from where you hold in your hand and pierce it completely through the skin, making sure to use double thread as you pass it across.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 Then treat the abscess as I have instructed, or if possible at both ends of the double thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 And if you doubt that the threads are not strong enough, then insert another needle through all of it from the incision made by the first needeled and pull out both ends in four lengths.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 Then cover the abscess until excess tissue forms, then remove the excess flesh and leave what remains.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply a poultice of wool in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses to nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in arteries and veins, they also appear on nerves when struck or from excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 And this occurs often in shoulders and elbebows where there are joints, and they have serious abscesses, their color resembles that of the body, and they cause pain in various ways.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when it is pressed firmly, it causes the patient great pain, but not throughout the body, rather away from the core.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 And it is moved equally in all directions; neither forward nor backward, up nor down, and those with joint issues should not be bound with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 Perhaps they would go against it;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And those who are at the head or forehead create ruptures in the dura mater.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If abscesses are small, if you have pincers, and cover it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if they are large, use a hook to extract it, then scrape and suture the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Large hanging sores
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 It never occurs in limbs and not elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its appearance, and the roots are fine, but the head is large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 and there are both small and very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 And I saw in the home two stomachs that were more fungus-like than anything else, with no differences, they were white, had fine roots, and were split, causing excessive moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I weighed them and found in one eighteen ounces, and in the other six, and the work of incision should be such that you examine if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If it breaks to the spatulum wide, and there are in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For from cutting often comes great blood loss, and if it does not stop, then quickly use the cauterizer.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 and if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 And then you constrain it, and continue to strain the thread of wax until it fits the articular cavity, and thus work is done through it.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 And if the roots are large, be wary of using it in one sitting for fear of burdening the stomach, but do well to cover most of it, then cauterize so it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the thole which is of sickly color and poor sense and lacking regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an encrusted boil, and I will come to treat this syphilis hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth is forcibly closed.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the appearance of gangrene comes from cauterization of a wound or fistula opening and is around the abd [domain] without swelling, as it occurs in other regions, or bleeding from veins or arteries according to what lies before, or edema;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 And if it is by the rupture of the sinew and the exit of the bile, then the color of the abscess appears similar to that of the body's flesh, and it is a slight matter without pain, open from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then there are various outcomes; and when one presses on its extremities, it recoils, then returns, and at times it may be hardened, with significant enlargement at the entrance of the bowel for intense work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and open well when you apply pressure with your hand, do not constrain.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens through these signs large and hard, and it adheres according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to inflammation, then it is tender upon touching, and the evacuations are such that you observe whether the appearance is from blood of an artery, or a vein, or inflammamenent.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to leave the healing alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is for the intestines or the belly, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dip his finger, and be extended straight up, then tie all around the bowels.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 Then command him to lie supine between your hands, then go around the limb that you have tied at all the spermatic veins, then extend half of the abscess above all along the large penis.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then bind it with a strong thread or a cord of sturdy silk firmly, and be sure not to loosen the ligation.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then work on extending half of the abscess above the ligature and apply your mustard plaster, then envelop the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you find it caught by the ligament, if you dislocate it, and put the intestines back into place through the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you find that there is swelling, if you grasp the tendon, and remove the excess fluid.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if the artery is acting against you, or it pulsates, and runs out abundantly, then return to your work and take two needles, insert them in a cross-shaped pattern where you previously made an incision.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then stretch the abscess in four directions above the needles and if you see it, remove the neednails, and let them remain until they heal, and drain any necrotic tissue.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 When you may the cow with its udder under and plucked, then treat as necessary, and when the abscess occurs as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and sew it shut.
dou chancre	Of burning sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in that section the similarities of syphilis, and how one should work with remedies, and how to purge the bloodletting.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And say the syphilis erupts in the skin, and great caution is needed for treatment, and our ancestors said that when syphilis appears on an exposed area or can be removed like warts in armpits, groin, and similar areas, it should all be excised at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when it is large and old, you must not approach it at all, for I have never been able to heal any.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 nor has anyone ever been healed by me before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the procedure, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said, involves emptying any black pus from the patient.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 then cleanse the wound if there is evident swelling, and prepare the patient properly to perform the procedure.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 then pour in your suppurating sores or ulcers, and any flesh at their base, and the bone without leaving anything.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 and allow the blood to flow freely, pressing firmly with your hand or another object, and if the spread of blood is opposite to the incision in an artery or vein, cauterize until it ceases.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat with another treatment until it is set right.
de ydropisie	From dropsy (edema)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, the signs of each kind, and the treatment made by medicines, and that which is treated with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	 if it only swells up;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 and one should not touch with iron in these two kinds;
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 that is to say, tympanites and hyposarca, because it's a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "swelling" with medicines and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides drops지, as well as vomiting and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not use iron, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 And if you see the patient in good physical condition and has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Lift the patient upright with your hands, and the assistant presses the belly, pushing water to the lowest part of the groin, then take the spinous-spatula as follows:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And so employ sharp instruments of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 At an angle, and always ensure that it does not go too deep until reaching the intestines when inserted. Do not spill it:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 Then look to see if dropsy has settled toward the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 If it is necessary, you should insert into the bowel on the side III directly above the elbow.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 If it is dropsy due to a liver disease, make an incision on the left side of the groin II inches.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 And if it is due to an ulcer, make the incision on the right side, and it must only be so that the patient lies above the incision where excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Then penetrate the skin with the instrument and stop it, and lift your hand to cover all of the tissue between the skin and fascia as when scraping for an amount equal to that of a fingernail or slightly more.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then penetrate the fascia until you reach the level of eight tissues, and it is the source of water; then proceed further, and stop with this instrument which has this shape.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 It resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of silk or light linen, and in the part below the small eyelet.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 and it has a stitch on one side, three loops.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 and two on the other side, one in the center;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is shaped as a pen tip, and it's the shape of the incision that the writer makes to cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 at the top underneaturally, so when it becomes moistened with water, they descend upon the instrument now.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 empty the majority or one-third of it because if you empty more than is needed at that time, by chance the patient may die due to exhaustion from holding their spirit against the weapon, as they sweat profusely, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 However, depending on the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's vitality indicates, and his hair.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 Then prepare the instrument and hold the water in it, and now retain it using a key that plugs the hole which I have described, to pierce according to this method.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 Then continue with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering such symptoms, and draw a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do this every other day, and be careful not to apply heat until it stops but for a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt about the patient, and leave him with too much water, whether by burial or hot sand, sweating a lot, bathing in sunlight, and drinking wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the care of medicinal desiccants until it is dry enough, and cauterization over the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of erecting the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There is never a child born with no foreskin on the penis, or if present, it is small, or not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If there must be done soon that he has pierced all the phallus very finely according to this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 Then place a fine plug in the bladder, and let it heal for three or four days or so until it feels ready to urinate again, then unblock it, allowing urination.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And perhaps nothing is needed in that case because the strong flow of urine leaves no blockage behind.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If it is found that his urinary tract is small, then it is indeed the medicine of a lead plug as we have said, which will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not naturally have the bladder in place are blocked, because none arise with the bladader at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless their penis is lifted upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And they cannot bend it because the matter cannot reach up to the bone, and it is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the penis and scrotum elevated like a small barrel, so that the peritoneum can be incised appropriately.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And beware of the bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, use the clamping point where blood is drawn from, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Of pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Many times this swelling comes in the penis, and it has an unattractive appearance of a burn.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And there are both harmful and harmless ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 If it is necessary to pluck them with a fine hook, cleanse and purify all, then place cottonwool soaked in Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the diaphincum ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and suppurating, it is necessary to treat it with fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 Once you have cleansed it and the sore is on the shaft with part within hairs and part towards the other end, if necessary to remove the sore that is within.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is healed, treat the other end.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 Because when you heal it together, ensure that the head of the shaft is not pierced and does not come to blackness and decay within the shaft or at the base.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to treat all that is black and corrupted, then place them on a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranate peels and vetches, then follow other remedies until they are healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 If bleeding persists, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The caustic helps with two dispositions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 This is to know, in the discharge of blood and putrefaction.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, one must insert or guide a cane in the penis and urinate on the patient.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 And when the hair is found at the top of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then one must scrape with a sharp instrument until the ties are loosened and free the head of the penis from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 If it is a serious matter to address this issue, you should scrape at the fissure with an instrument no more than halfway along the shaft of the penis and hair.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then carefully separate them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water on it without removing anything completely.
de la circoncision	For circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not a disjunction of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 However, when we perform this work of our own free will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the easiest for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 Because I want to include the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision before me on the organ, the strength, and everything anew;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 If it were the head because there are two tufts of hair, and occasionally one might cup it above and below that one without touching.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 But it is recovered from cupping, and the pain doubles, and with the cleansing that involves much fire there is not assuredly secure the tip of the limb;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 and with the cleansing of the nail by chance it escapes from the iron, and worms burrow in, and many times they emerge thus there is no need for further cleansing and I have witnessed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the trimming which is done using force on all parts of the sinew, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the force cuts equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 For when you press your hand, make the cuts evenly throughout all parts of it;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but let the veins be well narrowed around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and let the manner of the first work be such that you make it appear to the child if he listens, that you do not tighten him but bind the thread around the penis only, and then allow him to breathe in all ways possible.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 Then make a hole between your hands straight through, and the joint rejoins with strength in your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the movements.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then place your hand on the shaft and blow or cure it, and pull up until the head of the shaft is aligned.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then cleanse it well from any impurities that have accumulated there, then tie the socket with a double thread, and fasten below one end to another ligament.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 And hold it with two fingers by the second tied ligament to the scrotum and urethra, and wrap between the two ligaments, then lift the head gently and pull up the shaft of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 Then let a small amount of blood flow slowly because it is a male organ.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place powder on it and over the powder; a paste of half an egg cooked with warm rose water is applied, mixed with good quality olive oil, and left until the following day, and treated again as necessary until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The shape of the forceps for cleaning is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 Both ends of the forceps should be held and sharp, and the jaws as large as the pincers uniformly:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The mistake in cleaning is when the fluid within escapes from the incision:
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 Therefore it is necessary that you stretch your thumbs this way so that the eye makes an opening. (Note: This text appears to be discussing techniques or instructions related to medical procedures involving forceps and possibly suturing.)
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And cover evenly, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, if it has tweezers, and then cut the callus.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if they persist for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess has calmed down, and lightly scrape.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If you cut as you can move, and protect the area of the rod, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Therefore treat the sudden wound with powder as we have said or treated in our section on powders, and if you cut to an excessive depth, and it goes too far upward, it will not do harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Treat as we have said until it is sanitary.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or foreign object, which we have discussed in that section.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 And if the urine is not flowing freely, and you see retention due to a stone that is located at the bladder neck or urethra, then it requires that the patient be placed on their side with knees bent.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 and place your hands on the patient's back, extend their abdomen from above the lower back, and securely hold them as far as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 and then he presses on the bladder to dislodge the stone from above, which causes the urine flow.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction using all the instrument called "seringue," which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And it should be of fine, light silver wire, like the feathers of a bird.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And let its length be half a palm long and narrow at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the manner of urine extraction is to take a doubled thread and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at its top, then insert it into the wire.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 And trim the excess wool and insert it up to the top of the wire, then grease the wire with oil or butter and frankincense powder. Have the patient sit on a stool, and apply oil from urine, olive oil, and water to their bladder and penis.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, up to its root, then bend the penis towards the scrotum.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the male's approach towards emptying his thing, but it is not done according to this order because where she goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then extend the thread through all his hair little by little, and he urinates along with the hair, then extract it, and let him pass the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And repeat with the syringe as long as his bladamo is emptied, and settle the male's issue.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When incontinence or blood appears within the bladder, with pus accumulating there and you see to distill waters and medicines, do all that is called "clêpesdre," which is its form.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and if at three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 Part one, and part two, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And the tools with which the medicinal cord is such that it properly fills the wound without addition, and if possible to drain the moisture, and apply as needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you see your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the catheter where it should be to drain into the moisture, and leave them as they are.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 If you draw out the moisture through the catheter, then firmly reset the tube back in place;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 If more moisture enters there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is the form of the subtle enema used for cleansing the bladder:
si est ci:	 If so, then let them lie still; and
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 And it is of silver or iron, and the head lies higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 and below the neck where the ligaments tear.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep bladder and place the moisture you wish to apply via enema inside it, then tie it between two breasts with a good double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 Then insert the head with an enema into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladastery as soon as possible, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 And if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly through.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then insert a strong thread into these openings, then form the circle as you would with a wick, and put in what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it within the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do so as you did with the bladder, pressing into your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have discussed in the section the methods of stone removal and arrow extraction together with remedies;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 And I explained the difference between stones formed by rain, and all other signs, and in which type of stone one must work through cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 And in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 And I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that stones formed by urine in the bladeboily often occur in children, and it is a sign that water leaks from the bladder resembling water due to its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And it has hairs on its surface, and it weakens the ill person's strength, and they do so many times, and then straighten them out.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 and to numerous wounds, it affects their foundation;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 and the healing of children is easy until they reach four years old, it is very severe in the elderly, and moderate for those between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 and its treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema in order to expel all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For this prevents any time seeking for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the sick person by their feet and stand them up straight, turning so that the stone descends to the front of the bladeback, and sometimes comes out from above.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then make them sit between your hands properly laid, with their hands below their thighs, so that the bladeback is completely inclined downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then grasp and touch within.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel the stone in the space, quickly proceed to cut near the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not come out with the touch, grease your index finger on the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child or an adolescent.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 and push into its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, grip firmly at the bladder's neck.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 then press with your finger, and push down where you plan to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And instruct the assisting person to press the bladader with their hand and command them to extend upwards with their right hand the testicles, and pull away the skin beneath the testicles at the incision site.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then he applies the splinting bandage as follows: which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And it is made between that which lies between the joints and the base, not within but on the left side of the sinew.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 And it should be straight above the stone, and between your thigh and base, and let the shaft be as wide at its widest part and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 Occasionally press on that which is between your thigh and base so it feels no strain.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 And say if there are stones or edges within.
si est griés a issir;	 If the stone is difficult to remove.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And if it appears soft and round like glue, of which removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 To make a celi where there are edges and margins, enlarge the incision.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 And if it does not come out, then you must extract with tongs similar to a file at the tip, in order to fully remove the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 or place your instrument delicately like a curved awl at the top;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 and if you cannot do so thusly, make the hole slightly larger, and if it crumbles, extract with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 and if there are multiple stones, first remove the largest one from the bladder neck, then cut into it, then crush it, and after that, take out any smaller ones that remain.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, one must sear it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 If he dies or his urine returns through the same place because the bones cannot unite.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 Yet make an effort with milking or using tongs for debridement, until you clean it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 And when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, along with compresses, and place an oil-soaked cloth over it, using wine or rose water mixed with cold water to cool down a hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 Then rest the patient on his back and do not loosen the bandage until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, wash thoroughly with oil and water; then apply the final ointments of dafinicon and basilicon until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And if an abscess comes out in the wound and ulcers appear with blood clotting in the bladder, and it is retained as such that urination occurs without difficulty:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Thus thrust your thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, blisters will form on the vein, and pus.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then lift the wound free of water and exudate and feculence, and aid it in every way you can, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary that all wounds you treat, bind them with two bandages, and apply the remedies to the area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 And if the stone is small and it is caused by an inflamed vein and embedded, and the urine cannot flow out.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If you follow the treatment I have described here, enlarge it several times through this procedure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have also found this to be so.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and it is pierced at four angled tips in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take a thread around the rod under the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 Then insert the probe into the rod gently until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 And turn the probe to your hand in the stone little by little, as much as you can pierce through the stone from another side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 If it comes out soon with urine, then press your hand on what is lodged in the stone within the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 If it breaks quickly and rises swiftly with urine, and the patient recovers;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 And if you cannot do so due to any obstruction, then place a thread under the stone and another above it, then break the rod where the stone is between the two threads, then extract quickly, untie the ligatures, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And care for it until it becomes healthy again.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 Sometimes a stone may be embedded in women, and if this occurs once, it requires careful treatment and is forbidden for three reasons.
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 one because the woman might possibly be a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 and secondly, we cannot find a maid who is willing to undress in front of strangers, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 and thirdly, it may be that we cannot find a woman skilled in this art of healing hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 and fourthly, if the stone in the woman is more deeply embedded than in men, thus it requires deeper cutting, which causes great fear. And if necessary, one must seek a midwife who knows well and has little charge for her services. If you cannot find such a person, there are no guarantees of success with this method.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And he presents a well-trained dancer in the life of women, or a woman skilled in part of the art, and he commands that she do as you command regarding the inspection of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 Then it is necessary for her to insert her finger or instrument and search for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And if she finds it, she should hold it by her finger or instrument and advise that she inserts her finger or confides in the male companion, and presses her left hand against the prostate gland area.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If she finds it, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder towards below until it reaches near the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 Then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the leg where it is loosely attached, and feels the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 And do not move its two sides above or below the stone, and make the incision a small size initially.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 Then insert the rod in the thigh, if you feel the stone scrape away at the wound until the stone can be expelled, and know that there are many types of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 That is to say, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and with veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you examine the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the stone does not come out, then apply powdered alum to it, and hold it in place for an hour until the stone is dislodged.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your task, until the stone is strong, and have the herbs that I have told you for helping in your work with stones.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if it weakens you, and it is from the artery that has been cut, apply powder at the site and compress with bandages and splints, and do not repeat this action again, and leave the stone as it is unless the patient dies.
puis cure la plaie.	 Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood is subsided and the pain diminishes, return to your work as long as the wound remains closed.
de hernie carnouse	For a carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Respite is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white sores, which are from beneath the head of the joints that contain pus.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and they are called "syfas", and never properly in the fabric of the pus, if one thinks it is another kind.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 And this is the proper location of the vein we have mentioned, between the white fibula.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 And it has no other course than that.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the creation of this hernia is due to weakness in the veins, where that matter expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And never comes from striking on the joints, and this moisture is of many kinds:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it shows a leaning towards jaundice, or it lacks redness, or is black, or watery white, and this occurs more frequently.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 and these are the signs to recognize this assembly because if it is as we have mentioned - between the white fibula, then there are real boils close together like an egg's figure, but they do not break open the joints, for it has moisture all around them.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture in the actual fabric, then they are real boils with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white flesh, so it feels well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, if experienced throughout the entire affected area, then its form is as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, after the interspace, judge what is within it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we cure it with iron, it must be that the patient remains uninjured to the best of their ability and ensures the body's restoration.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 then he lies on his back, under a slightly elevated object, and covers himself with plenty of cloths.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 then lie on his left side, and command the assistant that he sits to the right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs near the jointed skin.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 then take the splint and pierce the skin of the joints along its length up to near the finger, and make the incision straight away turning towards the white fibrous tissue, and peel it delicately as much as possible.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then pierce his sore clean with water through a wide opening and extract all the fluid, then apply cotton wool, and lift the sore upward.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 And do not touch the root of the veins, but only the sore itself.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 Carefully cut or piece by piece the underlying tissue of him subtly, so that if you do not cut it skillfully, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 And if the vein bursts during your work, reset the limb to its place when you have completed the treatment of the sore.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then join the two pieces of vein root with stitches, then heal it as other wounds until they are healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if you find the vein tainted with another disease, it is necessary to bind the vessels that are swollen, suspecting a blood discharge.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then bandage the shoulder completely, extract the bunion as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if the sinew is joined into two parts together, know that these are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 If you bandage the other part similarly to how you did the first one, then drain any blood, and place a layer of linen soaked in oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 Then place another layer of cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two joints, then cover with doubled sheets, and tie it securely around all the bandage as shown in this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take two sheets and place pieces of shredded cloth according to this appearance and assemble them by sewing at the waistline, with one piece over the foot foundation up to the back, and the other on the part near the fingertips.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And the other two heads above the arms of Illium, and it is entirely fastened within the loop of the armor.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 And never is this medicine of caustic herbs without the use of iron for cutting, and you must take a delicate scalpel-like cauterizing tool, and scrape off the leather from the sheaths, and it should be moistened as we have said before; that the white sack containing water is revealed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 If you take the caustic according to this method, and pierce that sack with needles, and the scraping is done by this delicate hot caustic.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And scrape in all ways you can, until you have stripped it all away;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and keep that the fire does not touch the wool.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 And you must know this work is more healing;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 and maintaining proper blood flow, ensuring the procedures of cutting are done.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 and if nothing else opposes you, or abscesses or blood issues arise, then heal whatever opposes you, as previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horrific nature, then perform a perforation as I instruct you. Ensure that once you are fully certain by understanding what we have said about fluid evacuation being best, make the patient sit on the raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 and pierce the abscess below at the wide part of the thigh. Place the perforation along the long body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the passages be wide enough so that all the water runs strongly.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then place cotton at the site, bind it, and let the remaining water flow out, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And if the gauze bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or instrument as used in treating fluid leaks, of which the form has been described above.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And widen the wound slightly and ensure that water returns, and it assembles after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will regain their strength over time.
de l’aposteme des coions	Then cauter la le plasters tale of les art, dont the bleu:
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Be aware that in this treatment of this branch there are various preparations, which is why I think it should be left alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I will tell you about the treatment and resemblances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 I say then that many abscesses come in the body, especially on joints.
et c’est par mout de cas.	 and this is due to various causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 It means that it is because of excessive acridity and humidity spread on joints, or from impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 and the appearance of an abscess follows the body's natural coloration.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 and it does not cause pain initially, but is a serious abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 and sometimes it can be fearful and pus-filled abscesses with a shocking coloration, never originating from our arteries or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is from us (the body), then recognized by the heat of abscess when you press with your hands.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And it does not require you to touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 He who has swelling of veins is known by its tendency to pain upon the touching of joints, and can also be well treated with bandaging on this appearance, and on other injuries.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And you should cut off the heads of veins, then lift them upwards, and draw out the white thread soffion, and release the sphincter from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the vein is already softened by these treatments, then it is necessary that you draw out the vein and cut its heads.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is hard in the white thread or within the vessels, then you must release all its contents and roundly cut it off.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthmark is present where it should be, one must excise it completely and remove the bone, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once your treatments are complete, apply the woolen bandage with rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other remedies until healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Then cauter la le plasters tale of les art, dont the bleu:
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in a membrane resembling wings, with the softening of tendons, and the patient moves sharply when touched.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the treatment for this illness is as frighteningly painful as that one mentioned before, but we will instruct you on its procedure, according to what was done by those who came before us.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then apply a suspensorium to their knee joints and extend it towards both thighs, stretching all muscles near the groin area, and fully straighten their limbs.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 then cut with a sharp scalpel across the thighs, until they are exposed, and then scrape off from each side, as we have described in the removal of veins that lie within temple areas.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 Then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and attach it at the initial location where the vision appeared, then firmly secure to the opposite end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 Then wrap around tightly, according to the body's length, and treat the corrupted pus pockets.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then heal the wound as with other bandages applied, so that no vessel is left unhealed from either side.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 Because by this, there comes no harm, and all vessels are visible, then it is necessary to treat the joints for every vessel.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 If the bone loses its nourishment due to the incision of vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	For the treatment of scurvy:
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The treatments of this snakebite are by the cut that occurs or infected with worms, or the extension in the abdominal area near the wings, because the intestines descend from there to one side.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 And this treatment is with such a snakebite or from its extension, and they come in these two ways from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 Or by blows, or sudden movement, or screaming, or lifting of heavy weight, and similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 And the signs when it is from the spreading of a snakebite are that it happens little by little over long periods and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And the boils appear equally towards the chin because the snakebite hastens the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of severed snake, which causes sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse abscesses appear near the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body after being bitten by a venomous snake.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And it never leaves in circles with the intestines, and is retained within, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron which cause fear, one must be careful to remove them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the manner of treatment is that you command the patient to cleanse his intestines with his hands within the wound if it can be inserted.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 Then take a spatula over his neck between your hands, and lift the buttocks.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 Then stretch the head above it, and cut all the skin of the thighs lengthwise;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then insert the hooked blades of the trumpet into the belly according to what you need for opening the wound, and make them such that the guts can be expelled out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then scrape off the sack that is outside of the thigh skin until all the white fat has been removed from every part.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then insert your index finger into the part that is between the thigh, in the place where the white fat is outside of the skin and between the second fat sac, and pass through what is behind the urethra, and between the second fat sac.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move the hand inside the head of the clavicle, and extend the white snake to your left hand, and lift the eye from all of its fascia toward the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 And instruct the physician to extend the eye upward, and detach what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 And if there are loops of intestines or hard white fascia on his legs, and if you find anything unusual, then cut into the abdomen below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle or thick thread made of many threads, and insert it into the back part of the fascia, which is after the clavicle's skin.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the waist, then cut the veins that appear from threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 Then they join them one on top of the other in a cross-shaped manner, and tie the sica, which we have said is below the leather thongs, with a strong ligature made of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then wrap the heads of the arrows with the leather thongs and tie them securely with two parts, so that no worms that might infest can enter inside, to prevent any infection.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 And place the main ligature following the first long piece of that length, and after these two ligatures leave the sica which is under the heart of the thongs with a length equal to one finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 And then according to the roundness that the yew carries on.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut into the part which is underne.lye's leather thongs as well as the bow, as we have said earlier here.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then prepare linen with oil, and apply it to wounds, and fasten the ligature as we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is the face that we have mentioned cauterized, after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For this often happens, and leave the ligature until it is soaked through with its own fluids;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 And if there is delay in bleeding, apply warm water, and place as we have said, until it soaks through.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Then treat the wound with another dressing, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	For a carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this method, I have never seen anyone who dared to attempt treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said it is made like the threads that are wound around a screw, in such a way that you tie the ends together, slightly above the cut.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 Then cover it with your thumb, and treat the abscess where pus works, until the threads saturate;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And for treatment as we have said, until it is put back in place.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Never comes thrombosis among them, as we have said, and open the eyes.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And they do not send out any of the intestines with clots, and if there are any, it is slight, and returns within hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 And in any case, if it lingers too long in this area, the wound develops or a hernia forms until the clots are expelled.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 And this occurs from the extension of pain in that area, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen are the eyes and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 The treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously stated;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 At no time is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 And it is that the patient lies down on their back between your hands, then cut off the swollen area of the gout with a width according to the quantity of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 Then extract the sack that is under the skin which emerges, then take the thread and place it over the visible area of the sack.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 And press firmly on the front belly, then cut the two visible parts of the sack near the thread's end above its head, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 Then extract the thread's head, and do not cover the sack or extend any other substance, as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal wind.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Then treat with wound healing methods.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bandage the wound, cleanse it and treat the injury until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is bound, and it has no appearance in the rotation, and the cautery wound heals quickly here, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	For softening of the leather of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Many times is softened the skin of the joints in some people because the cartilage inside them becomes softened and appears to sweat.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 and it is necessary when one wishes to treat it, that the patient lie down on their back, and cover the softened skin with a natural layer of fat.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 then bring together the two edges into a suture, and if you do so, make first the excess softened skin into three or four firm stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 then cover between the stitchcuide care as with other wounds, until it is healed, and let the thread fray.
dou chastrement	By purging
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 I say that these treatments are outdated according to our law, and for this reason I wish not to discuss them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And there are not necessary for two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 one is that the bones in their place resume when asked, and they take the treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 and the other, for we often need cauterization of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 I say that cauterizations are done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 either by attraction or incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In that which we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its joints are softened and flexible.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 then grasp with your hand until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 Of cauterization by incision:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is proper that you grasp the best one, and press the skin of its joints with your left hand, then tie the sling, and cover each head with it after they have been properly scorched.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 And leave no portion untouched by such a thin wart or subtle wart found on the limbs.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 And this manner of treating is more effective than the one made by attraction, because sometimes nothing happens at an attraction, so the animal seeks excitement.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Then treat the wound until it heals completely.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphroditism refers to a condition where an individual has both male and female reproductive organs or characteristics of both sexes. This term was derived from Greek mythology, referring to the deity Hermes/Mercury, who was born with combined features of his parents Zeus (the sky god) and Hermah (a nymph). In modern times, it is considered an outdated and potentially offensive term; preferred terms are intersex or transgender.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways at home:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 One is where between the two openings it appears just as a woman's natural form, and may have hair, or sometimes they urinate.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is in women, and it is above their wrist like a rod and two hoops.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the treatment of the body and flesh is such that you bandage all swellings as with other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second way, for men whose urine flows through their thighs' skin, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	This section discusses an enlargement that may occur on the testicle or scrotum, which can be treated similarly to other ailments and conditions affecting these areas in men.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 A tumor is a swelling on the natural part of the body, so ugly to look at.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is necessary to trim the excess of the tumor with your hands or hooks, and bandage it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do not cut too deeply so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with another treatment until it is healthy.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And to another kind that arises at the base of the marrow, and swells, and occasionally bursts forth, and is similar in appearance to a cow's pustule, and therefore the ancients called it "malaedicta kowie".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to address it as we have described trying beforehand, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	Of quaking stones
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 Erratic if the nature of womanhood is not well perceived, or the anatomical features are small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 and it is natural by birth or has come about through disease acquired therein.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 or it's due to close contact, or by a stealthy fox, and is caused on the bone surface, in shins, behind, underneath, or elsewhere.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly having children.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And its recognition depends on observing how it behaves.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swellings are appearing in the arms or thighs.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is a thin sheep, and it comes near the eyebrows, quickly snip thusly:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 Place your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 Then extend the eyebrows properly, as long as the thin sheep moves, and cover the stumps;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 Then take wool, anoint with oil, and place it on the site, and lay the woman at rest each day until she can move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syphilic is hard and spreading, then one must treat with a cream resembling myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the stump is from a horse or cow, suspend it with a string and a bag;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 And have the healing blood remedies such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, abundant with egg yolk;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 Then prepare a bandage of broad cloth so that the wound cannot reattach.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 And thus it should be left for some time, and then replace with a tent made of dry flax.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat other wounds until they are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a boil comes with pus, one should cover it as follows in this manner, unless there are hardened abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For the hardened abscess in the boil, it is not to be touched with fire.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids are a condition characterized by swollen veins in the lower rectum and anus areas; it's often due to straining during bowel movements or increased pressure in that region from various causes such as pregnancy, constipation, sitting for long periods. For treatment: encourage gentle hygiene practices to prevent irritation, use of mild soapsuds and avoiding harsh chemicals; recommend softening stool with a diet high-fiber foods like fruits, vegetables, whole grains. Regular exercise can improve the blood flow in the body also important reduce pressure on veins from sitting for prolonged periods or straining during bowel movements to facilitate easier passage of stools; warm water baths sitz. For relief swelling treatments may include topical creams and suppository, cly-dilated veins. Apply aids ointment that can reduce inflamed areas swellings with the following: Wearing tight clothing or undergarments snugly socks; as they cause worsen'tilize after bowel movements to the area with warm water and sitz baths twice a day until symptoms. Improve; avoid pressure irritated itch, swelling painful hemorrhoids do not sit too long periods on seat:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Morphea are outbreaks of veins that without customary habitation, and when morpheas become old they turn into tumors.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 And we have already said in the division of those aforementioned, and the signs, and I will now say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that swellings and ulcers, when they are fully in the boil and do not appear by touch, but only heal with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that can be felt at the edge of the boil are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the tumor with tongs, and wrap it around its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood such as ground herbs and dragon's blood and incense.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then pour out his feet on an open space for an hour, then place them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And if bleeding ensues, let him sit in a decoction of sumac and peels from red apples, hawthorns, and similar things; then take oatmeal flour, mix it with honey and herbs, and apply it as an poultice on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it becomes stuck, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, make him wear pneumatic cups on the back and leeches without causing pain.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take linen cloth, and soak it in plantain juice or aglet tree sap with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess heals, treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And that which is called "albathir" is red and appears similar to raw flesh, so it should be covered similarly as I have described in the treatise.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then cleanse it until it becomes healthy again.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many ways of abscesses come in the flesh: like chancres and pus-filled abscesscups and herpes and erysipelas and styes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot sores, as well as other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 Thus, I must explain in this treatise the hot abscess that arises in the flesh, which is not just any boil-like swelling.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 and if you know how to treat with iron, observe whether the abscess is hard at its onset of appearance, and hot to the touch along with fever, and red when seen.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not hurry to puncture it, but let it be treated until the pain is alleviated.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 Then make the patient sit on a chair or bed, and place two small pillows under where they lie, and support them on their back while aligning their limbs to the dislocated leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And spread out his thighs, and place his arms under his knees, securing them well with a good binding.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then bind him to the right side of his back, and bring in the instrument used for working with the mouth of the marrow, after which comes the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 And it is necessary that when you see to use this instrument, insert the rod first in order to know the depth of the marrow; so that whatever enters through the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not hurt the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 If the muscles are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the tendons with linen so that they do not harm.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 It is necessary to place the tip of the instrument above and clean it thoroughly.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when abscesses are opened, and they cause severe pain, if necessary, cover the head with bandages or dressings.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when a bowel is empty, it is necessary to place softened pads soaked in rosehip oil or dried green olive oil into the wound.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 Place the hard dressing on the beginning of the tendon and put it below the tendon and above the inner lining with softened cloths soaked in water or boiled linens.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat it after applying ointment for two days until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 And never lift the boil and wound by using an enema of water and honey, then later just water or root extracts of lily and aristolochia, which have been long cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then apply ointment again.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed on the muscle, it must be tended without using iron, but treat as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 First ensure that the midwife knows the natural features of childbirth and can recognize signs if she sees a woman straining to give birth quickly, and desires to smell the ambergris.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 Then hasten for the baby to be born soon.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 Then say that such births follow natural patterns, and the umbilical cord is attached at its head, with the afterbirth accompanying it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, it is proper to gently press its belly so that the child soon emerges.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 For when they descend upon their head, with them is also joined the second twin, and freed are the parts of its body by proper cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 And this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 For it comes upon its feet at no time, and afflicts the body or head, hands, belly, or buttocks, and is twisted by chance around its neck, and in other malformed ways.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 One must be skilled and subtle in these things, and avoid errors and deceit, and I will show you all the ways one should help it.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If a child is born naturally head-first, and the mother labours heavily, and the strength of the child is weak, so make it sit on a saddle or hold onto by women.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and if oil of olive or fenugreek is cooked, then apply balm between its legs to the small gland which has this form.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and split the seam, and cut off the nail as long as the moisture that runs forth is.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and lubricate the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then enemas must be given to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 then make her sneeze and cough due to conditioning, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Now insert the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And if both hands emerge, it is necessary to reset them gently and gradually.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot re-enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet upward.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then stand the chair on solid ground, and soak the woman, that she does not stretch while standing.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 and if the hands cannot re-enter, and the child has died, wrap his hands with a cuff placed here beforehand, extract the child, and reset evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 Upon the exit of the child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the child comes on its feet, it must be pushed upward.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 and then rotate slightly and gradually until evenly straightened.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 then bend the legs slightly and extend them slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 If it falls just to the thighs, as commanded, one must pinch, and this causes sneezing due to the condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it rises again, so be it if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if not as we have said, slowly and gradually until it becomes according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not rise again as we have described, then take musk in tall oil, and ointment of saffron, and melted resin, and grind all into a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 and apply the substance to the woman's interior and exterior with this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until it reaches below the ribcage.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 and when she is softened below, you should apply a coat of myrrh, place it there, and leave for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 then make her sit on a stool, then induce sneezing and strain her mouth and nose, and gently pinch her belly, as the child is now rising.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	For the dislocation of the child in his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When a child enters this form, the healer places his hands gently but frequently.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 then slightly stretch their neck, and hang their feet downward, and let them lie on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 and bend their hands gently now and then, and then press the hands above the belly, and remove the pillows underneath until they are positioned downward.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 and if the child does not cry, take their feet and move them properly, then lift the belly forward, then place the hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 and therewith the child gently but frequently.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 and command the woman to breastfeed as long as the child sucks.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the dislocation of a child who comes forth with one hand extended wide.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 I require to engineer returning the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 If it cannot be brought back, lift the woman up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed and raise both legs straight.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then treat the swelling as I have described.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair and then try to return the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 And deliver the child as per natural course, make her sneeze, and command that she purges until the child is born strong.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	by c, and lire iste et sof; And that they n'l.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is necessary for you to wash your hand, then turn it slightly, and do so gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when evened, apply the natural swelling of aloes and oil as we have said, then command her to move slightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, let it sit on a chair, and command that she be quiet.
et la fai esternuer.	 And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, reset it all at the second attempt
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When it comes in this manner to the second stage, remove the splint with your fingernail, until all moisture is dried.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 and if the child leans on his face and neck, cut off the gag so it is not held, and let the child move.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 then put the child inside, until you have positioned him as required, and command the woman to remain quiet at no point.
adonques si istra legierement.	 Then do so gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the displacement of nerves
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Be aware that hemorrhoids often occur, and never as a group of three or four at once.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not a strange occurrence, and little happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Two are strange occurrences, and do not live without them for long.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know these, that they multiply greatly, and are displaced by the leech who sends them out, connected to swelling.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And none of them emerge naturally like a sore under the skin, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if they emerge quickly, the treatment is as we have said, and be subtle bailiffs, doing swiftly what they do.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And it does so as it should bring healing.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 Never are they formed in the marriages I through XVII or more, and all take on the form of a child by careful measurement with the holy reed, and it is appropriate for the bailiff to know this because sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 If done according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you treat a woman who has given birth to a dead child or miscarried and there is no bleeding, and you are forced by the situation.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 if it is necessary that you determine whether the woman is in good health and has not had any accidents or fears of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 if it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back with her head tilted down and legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 and you bind the minister's thigh at two parts, or if she is tied to the bed so that she cannot deliver the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 then rub the mouth of her thigh with oil from hellebore and fennel seeds and flaxseeds, then anoint the minister's hands with these oils and extracts;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then gently put it back in the joint, then seek to restore its natural position or make it even with the bones that are suitable for this, and be careful if the child is born prematurely so that it descends under its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the bones are out of their place in his eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or from the chin or near the shoulders or at the elbows, and if dislocations occur on fingers, they stick out or into the middle ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And it is necessary to heat the bone in his right hand, and place the splint between the two fingers of his left hand, and gently put the bone into any of these places we have mentioned until it fills the vacancy.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 And this is the form of the oncinous:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then place it against another oncinous, or if you need to extract one, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 And then extend it evenly by moving from one side to the other in order for them to come out, and make the oncinous teeth fit together so they can stay closed, as here is the shape.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 And if a part remains, grease its sides with oil and insert it there, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if none remains, place that oncinous or higher up, and cut as much as needed until it falls out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought together for grip, it must be wrapped up with a cloth until it slips completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then bind with a bandage at the joint of the foot or on the arm, so it is necessary to do the same in the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the child's head is large and stuck at dislocation, or it has an inflamed wound or swelling, then you must push the cautery needle between your thumb and forefinger, and make a wound to extract the pus.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 or you use the instrument called "almidach," from which it is formed with the strum or paste that follows this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 and thus make the child have a large wound naturally.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 and then break the bones with tongs, and if the head is forced out and twisted, split until the puss that exits from there.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 If it cannot exit, cut with a knife in such ways as you may.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if swollen on the belly or under the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	humdroit, And ils s'e d’est as it; if the tisnt eyne, and; In the lespie until you is to them so much li byttir, they of lits:
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if strained in the belly or udder, it is necessary that you drain with a cloth wrapped around by hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 and make the belly or udder well-drained until the moisture within flows out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 and if other limbs are broken or the head lags behind, hold fast with your hand on the foreleg from the joint, and pull to the mouth of the joint.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 then blow it into an enzyme twice or thrice, and triturate.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 If the mouth of the muscle is retracted due to an abscess that has arisen there, do not exert effort but instead administer moist and fatty substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And apply plasters, cut into fresh, softening, and moistening strips.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the child is on his back, you can position him evenly, and apply what we have said in a live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 and if they cannot move it, cut the thread into segments, leaving nothing of the tail.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, apply what we have said on abscesses that come in muscles;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 and if bleeding continues, put it into fresh restricting bandages, and apply other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman who had a mortal wound, then treat the other as described by.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came an abscess on his buttock, which swelled so much that it burst open, and began causing great suffering.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to seek treatment, and thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it under strong attraction, and an bone emerged, followed by others after some days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	lesse et so that t;t, the: ziz quet, eus;l.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I examined the wound, and for a long time handled it without touching the bone; until the woman was much improved.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 And thus she remained in this condition for many times, and soon there was some bowel back in its place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 And I have not recorded this chapter further because when the master encounters something strange, he knows how to handle it properly;
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the bone fragments to their original position
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 Hereafter comes the form of pressure, by which one reads the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 and with two turns adjusting the two keys to them.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 Nevertheless, the horn be more subtle in restriction, and made of smooth or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 And let the mouthpiece of the staff be one foot wide, and the edge of the trees two feet, and long a span and half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 And among the two joints there are two dislocations of the same nature, which are secured in each one, with a span half as long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 and these two dislocations are twisted into the mouth of the joint to open when turning both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in nature, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 and has two joints with dislocations, as you see, one span in length, and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 and when you see opening the joint completely with the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, laying her arms and legs outstretched, then place both dislocations together into the joint while holding the head of the instrument between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Then work with your hands on all the instruments, just as you did with the pincers equally, according to the quantity you see open the mouth of a hare, until the patient makes what they want.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 These tools are all kinds of tongs, and there are multiple appearances of them;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the patient is prepared, then the work is faster and higher in quantity for their needs.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the breeching is retained during childbirth, then you command the patient to retain their sinew, and next you make them sneeze into position, and restrain their hands at the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 And if they jump out of that position, well is it. (This line may be a bit unclear without further context as it could mean
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, take a small pot and make a lid or cup, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the ulcer, such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, saxifrage, and dandelion.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs or any of them should be boiled or steeped in hot water over the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 Then place a cloth or lid on the pot, and put the other end in the mouth of the ulcer, and let the steam enter the ulcer.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 Then have it sneeze out, as we said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you hastily grasp the shoulder blade.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, command the healer to have their left hand greased with pressed oil or an emulsion of alum paste, and then apply it again, seeking a second opinion.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when you have located it, then pull and extend it slowly and straight so that the muscles do not contract during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 However, it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled through.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it returns and dislocates again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the muscle is elongated, we have said the remedy is to sneeze and smoke medicinal herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 And if nothing we have suggested works, ensure that you do not attempt surgery.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 But it is necessary to tie what is at the mouth of the muscle to the thigh bone of a female, then enema with medicinal ointment from Tetrapharmacist.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 If repositioned and reset, it will return stronger.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 However, if she dislocates too often, a foul smell comes to the stomach and head, causing nausea in the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 If so, then fragrant incense should be used here:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 None of the ancient ones have tested the fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman for holding flowers and string is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it appears as if from a serpent, placing the head in subtlety within its natural form, and wide-set eyes near the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it should be fumigated with burnt coals, until tinea is exhausted, and then restart anew.
de percier lou fondement	Of Percy establishes the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is threaded with subtle filaments:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 Thus it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce that which needs to be drained at its rightful place, and not with an unclean implement or needle, and ensure the dressing does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply a cloth soaked in wine and oil to it, followed by an ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you suspect that it may reoccur, then apply a poultice of mashed plantain and let it rest for days; remove the bandage when the child wants to get up from bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And never does this swelling from wound or abscess come;
si covient coper celui soudement:	 If necessary, operate on that swelling:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 Then treat it as we have said about the bone splinter.
de la fistule dou fondement	Of the fistula at the base of the bladder
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that arise from the base are inflamed and swell further if they appear near or within two feet of the base, whether there is one fistula or multiple.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 And when that dislocation is old, work on it, and use moist or subtle bowels, and never are these perforations present.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 And it is known by what comes out or excretion when the patient has an emission, and perhaps at times a vomiting occurs.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And if there are perforations that penetrate up to the bladder, and almost to the middle of the member;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And they reach up to the hip joint, and near our anus' hole.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 Thus one finds a perforation in the base, but not leaking:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And it is to insert your index finger or base and inject with a fine needle of silver or iron into the perforation when there is no twisting:
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 If there is twistedness, then if you insert a fine pincers or horsehair, as long as you feel the pincer or hair in its proper place.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 and if you do not sense it, and there is no ejection nor windiness nor swelling as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 assure that it does not pierce.
si te haste dou curer.	 if the wound is cleaned thoroughly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or the urethra of urine, then he soils himself with urine and cannot be cured by any medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the pincer comes to its place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 If there is no twisting of the joint and the cause of pain is elsewhere, then it must be set back properly, and medicines or salves are not effective.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these Persian abscesses, there is no strong remedy other than the effort of treatment, and the foolish advice from those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those that are neither Persian nor ancient wounds, with hope of healing by iron, as I have tested, and the patient lies on his back under your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs inclined towards the belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 then insert an ointment of alum or plaque if there is twisting, until you know where the ointamo goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels pain around the lower jaw, it is proper to thrust your index finger there, if you sense then that the bite has been perceived.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and should reveal or between your thumb a sore or abscess is present, then declare it as pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 if one cannot treat it otherwise.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 It is commonly said that one can well heal some, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 and the advice is to proceed as follows: carefully apply the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been previously stated.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 and heat it thoroughly in the fistula until it reaches near the jawbone;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 and do this two or three times, as long as you know that the scars must be healed over, which appear like an eagle's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then treat the torn tendons with fat, as long as those fibers are lifted, then treat with soothing ointment and binding it tightly.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus treated, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If not, otherwise cannot be sound;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 And if it tries to pierce through, and does not reach the bottom which is at its foundation, and between your two teeth and the tendon there lies a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the abscess coming through that part where the skin is thinner.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 If you begin treating the abscess, and place it back before the tendon, then perform the cauterization afterwards, until it reaches near the top of the tende.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 And thus the tendon will be relieved, and healed.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Then mend those crooked bones which resemble a bird's wing, and leave none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If blood is lost, and it cuts between you and your work, cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 For the fire cautery gathers two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 It is to know, that is, the hardening of these dislocated bones, and the tightening of blood vessels and scarring from moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 Then the curing of soiled linens either by boiling or in a brazier until they are well-soaked, and then let the dislocated bones be secured in the lining.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Then treat the wound of sudden burns with a durable cloth, and are the medicines dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And when a fistula comes near the root of its foundation and is distant from the body, if you push with your thumb or finger into it and explore it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the tent, and within it is leather or bone fragments, or they are to be pierced, let there only be one hole for faith and hope, by means of one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 If you cauterize it as we have said, or until the bottom is reached, or if there are signs and treated accordingly first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 And do not go too far inwardly, that you do not cover the entity holding the foundation, and come out through the opening as it willingly does.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 Then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 Sometimes it will be healthy again, or remove that covering and cleanse after it has been uncovered near the foundation, or by touching or with another instrument prepared.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 Then shape the proper flesh which is in the wound as you see fit;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 Then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula on the part following the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If there were an easier thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And at no time are abscesses according to this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 and when you push the tent into the abscess, and it is near or against the foundation of the skin above, then take a pierced tent according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And take a thread twisted twice and insert the tent into the hole throughout until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is perforated in the margin of the skin's foundation within, then draw out that pierced thread so you can push your thumb or foundation:
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 and pull the head of the thread, and bring together both pieces, and hold them tightly, and leave for one or two days:
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 and you should not bind it at any time as long as the threads cover those spaces between them, and bleed.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	; they totir; a (1: The 1 (uze the first.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to first bind too tightly for support, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well-adjusted.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of a pointed thorn used to make an abscess soothers, which is quite sharp and one-ended, piercing.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and on the other side not, for it does not open or cut as one should see here:
des emorroydes	Of morose sores
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 Edema occurs in two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 or they are embedded in the foundation, like resin grains, and there can be small and large ones, with blood accumulation here, and one or more present, causing weakness of the foundation and atop it.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 but those that are embedded have little moisture, and with them there is or a bit of yellowish water or blood, and they retain the body's color.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 Et the treatment of those who have them in their foundation, it is that you command the patient to strain themselves to walk in chambers, until their foundations are firmly set and they show signs.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 If you hurry, and the nail is loose, or if it's caught on your fingernail, then clip its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 And if the thorns cannot be held due to their moisture, then grasp them with thread, or with cotton, or with a strip of chamois.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 And extract them from your fingers, then clip them, and powder them with hot ashes that are at hand for cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, and heal other wounds until they are sound.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 If the foundation cannot be removed, then enemas the patient with pungent and bitter clysters to cleanse what is at or near the base, so that it may open freely.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 If the patient perspires and if threads are strongly attached to the foundation, then [the treatment is] light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 And it is that you pluck them with your fingernails or pliers, then remove the threads, and treat as we have said until they are cleaned, and so he fears the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 If it is necessary to dress the wound in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Take a twisted thread and tie it to a needle, then pull the thread through from above and make the eye of the needle larger on the other side, and turn both ends of the thread away from the eye so that it is wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 And one strains the thread finely, then knots it, and removes the needle, and do likewise for all others, leaving a bit loose to allow excess blood flow.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 Then lay the foundation with fine cloth soaked in oil or wax, and place it on the foundation, instructing the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let them stay that way until they fall out, and when they have come out, then apply ointment or other treatments until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Of the bandage of fat or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	not t: (x1, c; and s cont :
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If it's necessary to remove the skin from a ganglion or an ingrown fingernail above, do not let it remain wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 Then treat it until it is sound as needed.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 If it cannot settle, resume scraping more forcefully than before until there is sufficient healing, and then it should be cauterized.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the treatment continues until sufficiently healed.
dou fremit	In trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 A formication is a small faulty appearance on the body and spreads widely.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 At no time is there a quickening of coldness, and it feels to them just like death by shivering, and it comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong crow feather and place that quill at the shivering point until the purple circle completely surrounds it.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand around to all of the quill until you cover it completely on all sides and remove it fully, and root out the shivering from its origins.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a quill of copper or iron as in this manner, and be subtle from below and traverse across.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not feel; hold them together, and squeeze tightly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see it, causticate the shivering point as with a fire cautery or branding iron.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of an enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Never has one made an enema of silver or lead, or melted wax or honey.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And never have these small and large suppositories been prepared in such a manner as they are described.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	the I:
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enema is as follows: if the belly is tied thus -
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 and there has been a rupture or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the head pierced within.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 and one of the sides may be perforated, while the other remains intact.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 and the belly or one's arm may be filled with medicines from an animal bladder or parchment. Then, pierce entirely through small perforations, ensuring there is space between each puncture, then insert a strong thread of twisted iron wire within, wrapping around as needed, and stitch the belly like that of a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medication is inside, tie it with a strong thread at the instrument, then enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medication be neither too hot nor too cold, and rub the head of the enema with oil or butter of egg, or similar substance, then apply it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 then the minister squeezes with both hands together until it is fully emptied, then removes the enema, and lifts the patient's legs off the bed, and as long as the medication flows out, do so as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 and if it sleeps all night, then provide greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the clyster in cases of bowel disorder, and the patient quickly needs to expel it, then repeat as much as necessary until they are well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 and if the hemorrhoid is at its base or an abscess, let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And this is the form of a subtle suppository with which the bladder can be tightened.
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have said in the section on wound treatment;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 or we will speak of hand and eye treatments, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of, and where or how the lacerations or injuries are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things by which wounds are made involve cutting with stones or swords and axes, or lances, clubs, or arrows, or similar objects;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 or those made according to the parts of the body, such as wounds that bleed from the neck, head, groin, thighs, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, because this recollection will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's due to a stone strike or similar causes; the skin is entirely torn and the wounds are large, so you should slightly doubt an abscess at heat.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 If the wound bleeds immediately from the head injury and is otherwise on the uninjured side.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 And avoid giving the patient wine and fatty meats for nourishment.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if it does not want to eat, let its meat be reduced, and do not drink wine or mix dishes with sauces.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 And apply a cloth to the wound if an abscess arises, then use softened cotton in oil only, or stipulate wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 If there is no abscess present, apply it to the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and has not moved due to air or dust, which I will say more about later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the arrow has been moved, apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's edge and gaping, and the lips cannot be brought together with bandages, bind them by suturing, as I will say for stomach wounds, of sutures.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is exposed to bone, and deep, and holds only slightly, then bandage it thus:
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 Then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard leather to its place, instructing the patient to eat large meats as tested with wheat, also similar things such as hairs.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find the hard leather or skin rotting, and there is nothing to it but bone, cut off all of it, then pour wine on it, and treat.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without bandaging, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, whatever you find the artery, and if you discover it dislocated, tie with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And for small and simple wounds, there is a light remedy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 and that you apply this powder which dries as well as the ash of saltwort.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 And the manner to make the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	 Take incense one part,
sanc de dragon II parties;	 blood of dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 calx vivus three parts, and grind the powder finely, apply to the wound, and bind firmly, until it dries well and reattaches with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 And then bind it well, and let it not dislocate again, if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 because the medicine is not taken until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	. The English (and the t'tf; and;
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound has moved, especially in this case, do not apply this powder again.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 but apply some digested ointments, or crushed barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then continue to treat other ailments once it is healthy again.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And if the bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, extract using delicate tweezebar or similar tool.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 and I will tell you about head fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	From the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck or below and it is a simple one, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins of the neck or the artery are injured.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is the sinew, there is no other remedy than to let the poultice remain, and not put anything binding on it, for it harms the sinews and makes them retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the sinews is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But use the medicine as if boiled in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked similarly in soft water, along with other mineral substances according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce or make an opening lower than it is located.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 If the arrow is near, and blood flow occurs, remove it, elevate, and cauterization may be necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 If the spine of the throat is near or cut, and the vessels are guarded, which determines how flesh heals, if possible to lift the edge of the throat's cradle, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then allow rest and time for healing, then treat with cleansing ointments until it is healthy.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if the wound has caused pressure on the bone, adjust as needed.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 If there are bone fragments, grind all that you can and those you cannot remove, let the wound remain until it heals, then clean and align the edges.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wound is fresh, then apply powder as I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound of spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it is a puncture from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then observe if there are any signs of venom as they affect the patient's condition.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Then say that the wound is fatal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder at first hour or bind it to stop the bleeding that may flow out in large amounts, and harm the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 but put attractive balm on it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 and if you do not have balm, put in the wound a piece of old cotton to absorb the moisture, and make the patient lie on their back with the wound facing upwards for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 If there will not come muscle spasm, nor unpleasant shaking of the body or straining.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the proper alignment of the bones, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Treat with bandages and other remedies until well.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if it cannot heal on its own, and works, then know that there is an abscess.
si la cure si com on doit.	 If the treatment is done as one must.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or elsewhere on the back, treat as one would for a wound in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it is large, bandage.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 And if it is small, powder, and if it is embedded in the bone with broken pieces, treat the wound, and extract the spears if they are lodged.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not relocated, allow the wound to rot, as it lightens extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 and with other wounds in other members there is judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	if they are not can be c sting et, and de le ou deset l'est est due to heu in les oment le puest men or, with a la est much: b
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The falling of the belly is great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 From a great wound never enter the intestines or the veins of the intestines, preventing any influx.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the surgery is more challenging, and never worse than a small wound compared to a large one, for when you reset the intestines often, it must be done gradually.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 Because the intestines swell so soon when they feel cold, they become more inflamed, and thus it is easier to move with a small wound, therefore you must reset the intestines to their original place rather than elsewhere.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The two common sutures occur in the abdominal wound, and the sutures of other bodily injuries and the other two specific sutures are shared with other types of wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 Et indeed they are better with a stitch on the abdomen, and I will say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines is torn, it can be repaired in two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Moisten an absorbent cloth or a piece of clean linen in warm water, or boil it in hot water and add salt and pepper, and warm the intestines until they are inflamed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 and never use anything to hold them back; rather let it be moved to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the swelling separated, soften the intestines with water or vinegar and if they are hard, for through this is made easy the entry of little things.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if they cannot enter, make a small cut with an instrument used to remove bunions.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 And the first remedy is that you may trim it, but no one should cut without great necessity or need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 and this is to split open:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 if you make a hole in the hollow and it does not bleed out, then examine its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When the wound is enlarged and the intestines have burst forth, if you can put them back in place according to their natural form and proper location, do so if possible, for this will move.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and located below the belly, it is appropriate to make the patient lie on their back with legs raised higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 If it is in the part below the belly, raise the head and the hindquarters higher than the lower parts, and similarly when the abdominal area is on one side, balance by making the injured side raised so that the affected area is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And thus you should treat as I have described in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 For small wounds, use what has been prescribed, then take an emetic with healing properties in your hand, and bring the edges together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 This is the common method for suturing, and you should take a needle or several according to the size of the wound's width, then leave space from the top edge of the wound as needed, and insert a needle with good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 And pierce the two heads of the clavicle with the two heads of the scapula, which is under the skin within, until you have cut through that part and join together the two heads of the scapula into four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 Then strain a double thread through the needle's eye twice, then immediately join together the two heads of the wound, leave space for one finger, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so according to how many more needles are needed until the entire wound is tightened.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 And let the needles be of medium size, between subtle and thick, because very fine needles can sew through completely, but too thick ones cannot penetrate well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 Hence it is necessary for them to be bent back into place.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 And you must not push the needles too far from the wound and through the skin, as they may pierce and reopen the wound before it is healed.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 And then bend the tips of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place pins or cloth at the tip of the needle to hold them in place, and leave until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second suturing method is common and involves joining the two edges of skin together with one needle and strong, medium-thick thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And when you have perceived these all together IV times in succession, adjust the arrow at the part where you began, as one does with fabrics.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 and place space between each stitch the thickness of a small finger;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 These stitches serve as a suture, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his abdomen, which was afflicted by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, with intestines protruding about two palms wide, located within the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestines because it had been fourteen hours since he was injured, and I dressed his wound until the fifteenth day, and cared for him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And the physician judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 and I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And put a cloth twice daily over the wound, and wash it with honey water until healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 Take a needle and pass it through the part forward up to its inner depths;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 When it has felt the head straight left or right, where you have inserted the needle into its socket or casing, and pierced from another side to within until reaching that far.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the understanding of this suture is that you cut it as a tailor would with scissors, and leave one side of the socket once, then rejoin from another until the suture is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second manner of suturing that Galen properly describes is as with those who join two parts together naturally and apply one end of the socket to the other end in such a way.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Pierce with a needle or nearby metal rod and make a cut there only, leaving the two ends of the socket.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through to the forward part up to inside the socket of the eye.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then make it pierce both forward parts to inside the socket of each eye, in two other eyebrows that are opposite.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And this is the proper method of suturing and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen says this word, and no one bears witness to it, that you must sew the abdomen with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 and one needle should be inserted from one side, and the other from the opposite, in the manner of those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And know that when the rupture is within the abdabinee, it must be sutured more carefully than other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgments of wounds are such as the judgments of other wounds.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 and it is that when you find the fresh wound fully supplied with blood, thus as the art directs, reset its intestines and the cord.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 then apply to it with the powder of jarnac, and if the art has moved it, place any salve that is available until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 and strip the hairs, then cauterize with tar, honey, and myrrh;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then treat the wound as you would others until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 and if you have no medicine, apply these immediately when the wound starts to close: cotton, and stir it twice daily until healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 In certain situations, there is no need for additional medicine when wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 And if you suspect that the wound is affecting proximity to the main members (limbs), it is necessary to gently grind linen in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the limb and underneath the elbow pads.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 And if it causes pain or swelling in the armpit, which often occurs, apply a black wine enema and particularly when the swelling reaches up to the intestine.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And proceed with probing, and know that it is easier to heal when it concerns the large intestine than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is distressed, and this is because of the subtlety of its veins throughout the body, and its closeness to one's essence.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the kidney protrudes from the wound, reset it as well as the intestines while they are fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if it is old and has turned or black, then you must reset the dislocated part that is black, so as to prevent bleeding from vessels and veins.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then wrap what is between the joints and hang two belts from below the wound area to ease extraction when splinters are removed, and the wound bandages.
de la routure dou boueil	From the treatment of a boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are exposed and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in certain cases, as I have seen a man afflicted by an arrow or a stab to the abd([domain])ent.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, which became infected and turned into a fistula, causing diarrhea and gas.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I gave care according to what I could, and did not stop probing until it was healthy again, and the joints were restored.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw it healed, I suspected that the patient still had pain in their stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and there was no harm, but they remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 and experimentalists said that for small wounds in the intestines, it should be treated in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 take fat from large kidneys, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the fat has fully closed its mouth, place it under two lips to stretch its mouth out.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 then wrap the head with bandages and keep it so that it cannot loosen, then place another piece of fat afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed.
et cout la plaie.	 And observe the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 The head so swells in the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient, and it is possible to suture the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 Take the head of this thread of intestines that is well cleaned, and then tie it to the end of a fine linen thread twisted tightly, put the thread on the needle, and sew through the intestine, and return the stitch.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 And this method of suturing aims to be only as strong as trust and hope guides it.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 And if the wound is large and wide, especially when located in one of the triangular intestines, there must be no remedy nor health, only subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or when it occurs
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Every wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula," especially when it opens and bleeds.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And a fistula follows incorrect nourishment that is hard and pale, where there is no pain, and it swells like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 and sometimes clear bowels, and other times thickened;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 and at times scarce, and at other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 And I have spoken in the division of wounds, that any wound not healed has no cure unless by one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 It is to be understood, by the insufficiency of blood or body.
ou por sa malice;	 Or due to its own malignity.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 Or because there is hard cure within, and under the lips, that it does not allow blood to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 Or because there is too much boweling.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 When the bone is fractured, and the material is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 Or when the medicines are not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 Or because corruption is a form of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 Or due to the property in that region being slow digestion and delayed health, and fleeing by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 Or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in the section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula that is done by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Say that abscess occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 because there are abscesses that come from large veins and arteries, nerves, or the liver, intestines, bladder, some ribs, spine of the back, or any joint in hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 And if there is pain coming to the principal member's property, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 And all types of fistulas that are of this kind have poor healing, with only effort and ignorance involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is no fistula that reaches the location I have mentioned, and you trust in its healing, and witness it coming to light, then take a tent of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of lead, because the lead sinks and bends around the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has openings and you cannot properly search for it with tenting, then cleanse by enema through one of the openings, as moisture quickly moves from one opening to another, and cleanses.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then skillfully use your power, to know if there is bone or nerve, and see how deeply it's cut into, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressing with your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 And when you truly know how deep it is, and if it's far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any of those places I have mentioned to you, then proceed as I have instructed you, and remove the broken bone and the corrupted cartilage within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 And then heal it as much as possible, and if the abscess is well deep in its right place, you must cut into it fully, as far as you can see, then insert threaded ligatures with medicinal vinegar up to the top of the abscess until the medicine erodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then apply balms with holy herbs until it becomes sound.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it does not heal with this, then proceed as we have described to cauterize; and if the bone is corrupted by an abscess, protect accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If veins or nerves do not trouble you or principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackening, treat with holy herbs until it becomes sound.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 And if it does not heal, and the bowing remains as before; know that you must not go beyond this.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 if exposed and festering, cleanse until reaching the bottom, remove all decay, then return it to its place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it is thus healed, well done.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 If not, know that the infection is too deep, you cannot address it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 if there is no other remedy than applying heat naturally.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with pincers, remove it using an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, extract all of them without leaving any.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, strip the flesh and bone and separate the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot remove them all at once, place an unpleasant substance to prevent decay on the wound, and leave it until flesh grows around the bones, then they will have easier access to the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, so thoroughly eradicate the decay until all the darkness has turned to bone, then repair the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if there is a large part of it affected by decay, and it reaches close to the mole of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 If it needs to be cut away and covered up all the way to the decay, then heal until it is solidified.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in the leg of a man, so take example and assistance from your craftsmanship.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 He was a youth under thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause that came out of the body, as the substances reached the leg and were expelled through a large abscess, without any cause to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But the wise men worked so much on the abscess that it opened up, and they used a lot of materials, which then became an ulcer, causing great discharge and wetness throughout the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 And many wise men attempted to heal it within two years, and there was no successful treatment in the art of hands until I came upon them, and saw the leg and the remedies with which they treated him, as the discharge affected much of his body.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 And the body of the youth turned red, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I pitched a tent in one of those places, and then searched all the places, finding that each came toward the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 So I proceeded quickly and examined one of the discharges until I discovered a piece of bone, which was found to be decayed and porous, with the infection reaching deep into the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I saw what appeared to be a rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 And began to heal the wound with powerful medicines for long periods, but could not close it.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 And then I resumed the treatment, and found the bone as before, discovered continued corruption in the bone, removed it, extracted it, and attempted to close the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 But I couldn't remove all within an inch of the bone, and it rebelled against everything, so I then treated it with medicines again.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 And it became clean and closed quickly, and did not need to resume the treatment except due to the weakness of the patient who couldn't endure more, and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood often makes him groan, but he was wholeheartedly healthy, and in place of the bone grew a hard callus, which was well-disposed and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if the bone is broken at any place on the body, it must be treated as follows:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take hold of the ligament, and stretch to the head of the fractured bone, and command that no one stretches it upward.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 And place another thicker ligament alongside the first, and tie it above the cartilage that is over the bone, and extend the head, such that you remove any corrupted cartilage from below, and reveal the cartilage at the location where you need to work, ensuring not to damage the cartilage.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 And place a knife or a spatula below the bone to scrape off the corrupted cartilage.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And it must be done as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and do so again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a joint or part of it, expose all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then apply a hot compress off, and then connect the part with another of the corruption, and let it be as long as the corruption allows, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and connect the bone where it was located on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there should be no other aid than coping.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 And if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or foot, it is a very strong thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion and how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 And clean it in all ways you can, but let neither vein nor nerve oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 and know that the cutting instruments and needles to repair these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 and therefore it is necessary to equip each type of work with its instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 and know that the work will show you which instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 if you consider the instrument needed as it should be.
dou feu	If by fire.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The head may dislocate from within or due to weakness;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 And when you have the medicine for treating that corrosion with medicinal remedies, and they are not effective, it is necessary to amputate the limb where the corrosion occurs so that the patient may escape death or evil, which is greater due to the fault of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 And the signs are that the limb turns black and appears to be burned with fire, after which comes the spread of the member's corrosion throughout the entire body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 If you hasten the amputation, and if it is by the sting of venomous beasts such as scorpions, snakes, and similar creatures, when the corrosion is at the root of the hips, perform the cut, so that there will not be space for it to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 If it reaches up to the hand, so that the cup touches the joint, so that no erosion comes up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 And if it comes to the arm, so that the cup meets the bone.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 And if it passes the bone, then it is death, and there are no remedies except for the amount of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 And so act as follows when erosion comes or pierces:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 If it comes to the first joint, then the cup after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 And if it pierces or penetrates, then cover the entire wound.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 And if it moves to the leg, so that the cup meets the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 And if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than putting the sick person to death by leeches.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And the manner of using leather or silk on the limb is such that you tie it above and below, extend two strings one from each end of the ties, and cut the bandage between the two bands to a width of one span.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then the bandage or silk and place a thread of flax on each side, ensuring that the silk does not touch the healthy skin, otherwise it will cause further injury and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if bleeding occurs while you work, promptly causticate the wound or apply certain binding powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a tough bandage and care for it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And I shall tell you what happened to a certain man who was ill.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 It came upon him a darkness that seemed like scorching fire, and this corrosion first affected his two feet, to the extent that it consumed the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 And when the man saw the corrosion, he quickly covered the foot with a copper pot and was saved.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 And after some time the corrosion returned to his two hands, and it came upon me, and I put on things with impact following body purification, but could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And he prayed that I cover his hand, and although I hesitated, I had hope of reinforcing the material.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would not survive, because the virtues of the body were weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 And he is utterly perished, and returned to his land, and struck with a sword on his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 and I have not recounted this method except for the sake of providing alternatives, if they are needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 No abscess ever occurs in a hardened spot, and it persists so long that it forms a large collection of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 and then they burst open and drain, with the pus flowing out like water from wells.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 and the skin above is as delicate as finely cut silks, and they do not run all the way to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "healed," and they are not called "fistulae.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 But if it is so stretched that it reaches up to the bone at its center, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 And if the cure is such that you must cut out all of it, especially when it is thin like a piece of cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and it cannot be for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you suspect that the tissue is hardened, and the corruption is not at its core, and the tissue is composed of earth, then use the treatment as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels that lie within are of foul smell; then you must use an Egyptian medicinal clyster made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 Take saffron, and oil, and litmus, in equal amounts, and put to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medication is red and thickens like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 And then take as needed, and make it with onion and honey, and cleanse the chest, and strain urine.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 Leave the medicine in place for two hours, then extract by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this many times until the chest is purged, and waste is released from the bowels.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 Do not use watery purgatives of ash unless this medicine is absent, and gather ashes from grapevine wood, pour water on top, then strain, until you know the chest is thoroughly cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water, strain with a mixture of water and honey containing some litharge.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 When you cleanse with honey and sweet wine, may the honey have properties to purify and wash, and the wine make healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 And when you have done this, and assured that the intestines are properly cleansed, if you instill something to encourage heat within them, then take a hollow reed and do so with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 Or you instill some medicines and unguents, whose properties I have discussed in treating with unguents.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the intestinal opening is small and what's in the clyster cannot enter, slightly enlarge it with a piece of iron, and place there an Egyptian unguent or basilisk unguent until widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If the wound is too wide, and the edge allows it to remain in place where the enema can enter, and if there is a tear with blood flow above or below its location.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the bowel is inflamed, do not irrigate it with saltwater.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot expose the bowel as you see fit, then arrange it so that the inflamed bowel is directed to the lowest point possible. For when the bowel is inflamed, do not irrigate it with saltwater and if you cannot open the abdomen as you wish, then set up in such a way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 so that the bowel flows gently downward, and do not leave any part of the bowel.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 And take binding medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over it a cloth of flax that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 Then wrap the affected area with strips wider than the initial one, and apply ointment under another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to reduce swelling, without removing the large cloth for many days afterwards.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And for those with a wound on the body, they often remove and clean it to alleviate swelling, and know what flows from the swelling, whether it's poison or little or quite a lot, or digestive, or indigestible.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there's an abscess or not, and when the medicine has spread in such a way that you see its nature on the wound, understand that the injury is healing, and approach treatment.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 And then you dislocate it in the morning or after a day has passed, and when you open the wound, change to another bandage and renew the ointment application.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	they le de:
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 If subtle symptoms come after long periods of time, do not despair over health, for the sickness approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are people who delay healing in their wounds with wine, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 and they suffer an indigestible breastache after many days, affirming that the breasts are not swollen.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 and they experience delayed breast milk flowing, and it is prolonged. They use dried medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, like an expiring ointment, for there is much of antimony powder, which is the last remedy.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 They take an expiring ointamoisture, and prepare it with rose oil, ensuring equal substance of old wine;
puis le confit et en use;	 Then he applies a compress and uses it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 And the same does more good when applied to swelling, especially if balms of myrrh, olive oil, and incense are not available, take frankincense and aloeswood and incense, grind it, and powder it over honey as it heats on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 And then wrap it in a cloth and extend it over the chest, never apply long-lasting arsenic (arsenical soap), and roots of the holy lily, which are like flour and semolina.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 And use simple or complex remedies;
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 Grind them, turn into powder, and mix with the honey as I said, and apply.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 And if the ailment is prolonged and not healed by this remedy, then say that decay has set in, causing pressure on the bones or hard limbs, or joints;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 If the treatment of a fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of an abscess of a nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Pus is an abscess that arises from under the fingernail of the hand or toe, or sometimes occurs in other joints.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 And when it is infected and not attended to, if an abscess breaks open, and worms and pus flow until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps consume the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 And it reaches to the bone causing intense putrid pain, and the toe joint is swollen, and the skin turns black.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, then one must excise all the excess tissue from underneath the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 The fire cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is clean.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 If the hair begins to press into the skin and starts to itch, it is necessary that you trim the nail from under which the hair points, push upwards, and carefully extract the fine hair. Then apply a remedy on the area with heating and corrosive substances to remove all of it;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat with ointments until it is completely healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if there is corrosion on the bone, and you scrape it out, and treat with fire cautery, because as long as the bone is consumed by this, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you see the joint being corroded, scrape out as previously mentioned, then treat until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 If it is struck, and swollen, and it causes great pain, you must first soothe it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 Then cauterize the double thread with a diagonal cut above it, and be careful that the incision does not reach to the bone under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if this happens, apply something soothing on top.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	to be a;
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocated shoulders that are found in some men by chance are all flesh, and sometimes there are bones present, and at other times only a part of them is there, and none of these arise from the root of the joint where the origin is among our shoulders.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 Those that arise in any of the two thumbs do not move, and those that arise at the knuckle joint, sometimes they move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The incision for one who is fleshy should be lightly made, in a particular way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Make the cut at its root of a wide double thread.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 Those that arise in the base of the joint are difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	 If you hold it with a cup.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In those that arise from the last of our shoulders, it is necessary to first bandage roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then treat until healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	so that the main; y-line contertret ond le JJSH: he c m, forta.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 If it is necessary to cover the sweat, so that they may heal according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 Then place between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or you put between two pieces of fine linen until the wound is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	should be and they are not the s.
des vils	 If a wickedness befalls you
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 These are large sores covered with excessive fluid of a melancholic nature, appearing on various parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 and it often occurs in the legs of those who walk or work and carry things, more than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	by him t saye est plus other thatt.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment with iron is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 One way is to cover them and bleed the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 And the other manner is to lift the vein, and pull it all through.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The size should be according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 The first step involves the leg with very hot water, until the veins are sufficiently dilated, then hold the leg gently by pulling it from above the hip to below the buttocks.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 Then cut the vein in one place (either I, II, or III), making it wide, then extract and pull out black blood into your hand from top to bottom, as much as the virtue of the malady can endure.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 And then bind it, and instruct them to dye with black meats;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And begin evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, without causing harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The movements of his limbs follow this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Raise the patient's limb that is painful if there is much hair, then give him a bath, and soak his leg in warm water until it turns red, causing the veins to swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 and if you do not have bathwater, warm it by fire, then cover the veins along with cloth at the knee or below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 then proceed to treat the skin at the bend, and scrape the veins from each side until you can feel them.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 And it appears red and black, and when entering or cutting skin, it seems like a gray cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then insert the blade gently until it pierces through the skin, and then secure it with light stitches, then tie at another location above three joints.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the skin around the wound until it appears, then lift with forceps as you have done, and stitch with another suture line as before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then make another incision or more if needed, then lift it and cut near the joint, then stretch and pull until reaching the second suture.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then extract from stitch to sticht all at once, then stitch again.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 If you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle through it all, pierce the skin and pull, and push up from under the vein, and turn your hand this way and that until it pops.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And ensure it does not crust over, for if it does, it cannot be drawn or lifted, causing harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have completely drawn it out, place a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 If the vein is twisted and tangled together and not straight as we have described, then it must be cut lengthwise but not crudely.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And the treatment is as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The form of iron used to make the cautery must be curved and not sharp so that it does not cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 and is of large thickness, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but be broad as we have said, here is the form.
de la voinne civile	 Of the civil vein. (Note: This phrase may refer to
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is situated in legs, warm areas where no plants or trees grow, and on land that lacks moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens from swelling that arises beneath the skin, as it does internally with serpents and worms, embedded between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it comes in the leg as a great swelling, then the lump changes, and the vein begins to bulge outward, like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the head is opened, it must be wrapped with a bandage of lin cloth about one and a half yards up to two yards along the leg, leaving the bandage on the limb, and each time there are no stitches left undone, wrap it again around the bandage.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and then wrap the remaining portion, but do not cover it entirely at its root until completely removed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 because if you cut it, it may enter the heart and cause an abscess or decay there, leading to a severe illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 for this reason, it must be treated little by little up to the root, and nothing or any part of the core should remain.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 and this vein should never be treated when it's length reaches V or X hands, and a man came to me with one of such lengths, and when you cut it, it bleeds I or II drops, and the wound goes through to the bottom, causing everything in it to flow out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 And let the matter within be emptied, and bring suitable herbal remedies daily for a day, then treat as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And never strike the vein with your hand until it opens in the joint of the foot or toe, and when it bleeds profusely, and the blood flows out.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Then treat as we have previously mentioned.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 And from worms that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This disease is called in our land "ox disease," because it often occurs in the veins, and is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, moving up and down throughout the body, feeling painfully as it passes through muscles until it pierces the skin where it travels, and bleeds profusely.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as those coming from worms and snails and ascarids or belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And there is doubt about its nature because when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the brain, by chance returns, and destrocks the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 And this occurs many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you see it being treated and drawn out, one cannot force it when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 So it is necessary to bind the area above and below a strong joint tightly, then cut into and draw out thick matter, and if you cannot reach it entirely in its place, burn with fire on top until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 And the greatest harm it causes is that they run a fever, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 and if you see it coming or near the eyes, firmly pull out the eyebrows, then cut around them, and tether.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 And it is necessary to use the patient of bodily purification with dissolving medicaments for bad humours, and wash off putrid meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain which arises from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called "wakeyre" in our land, and it brings pain to certain limbs, then moves from member to member.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to an unwell woman, and discovered some swollen arms, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And shortly after, the vein rises as if on a shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like silver when it falls from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain departs from that spot, and spreads to the shoulder, and then shortly after courses throughout the entire body, until it reaches the opposite arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then he told me that it returned within his body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	sofle a lisso:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 Nevertheless, I had wanted to make sure that the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman as I observed.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 and I thought that this was because the woman had dry veins, with open wounds, and thus appeared to be bloated.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And they do not appear according to this reason for those who are diabetic, and who have moist bodies and veins restored.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see that this disease needs curing, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then scrape above and below swiftly, and afterwards cover until the inflammation subsides.
et cauterize le leu;	 and cauterize thereafter.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat as for those who are troubled by inflammation, like rotten pills, and pills of iron ore, and similar things.
des saiettes	 Of arrowheads
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrowheads are diverse, depending on their appearance and the way they pierce the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The variety in them is that there are those who have large points, small points, hairy ones, and smooth ones.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And of those with two edges, and of those with tongues, and of those with projections.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and that which flows in no limb, it flows according to the following methods:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or in principal limbs such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it flows thus in no part of these limbs, the sign of death that I will tell you hereafter is evident:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 if it must be considered for the extraction of this arrowhead, as death comes afterward in various conditions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 and when these bad signs are not evident, and the arrowhead is not completely embedded, then treat it as such, and care for the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 When the arrowhead enters and penetrates the bone near the brain, causing a hollow behind it on the skull, which is when blindness occurs along with numbness, trembling and reddening of the eyes, and inflammation and red tongue, spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 and sometimes it is without force in the nose or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 and occasionally it affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 and the wound appears as white hair-like growths, and heals like blood from a wound.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 If these signs appear to you, pursue the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 When the sign of the arrow as it passes or enters the body, is near the left arm, and feels similarly as if it had been driven into a hard object, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 and perhaps the arrow moves like hairs, with black blood flowing outward, accompanied by coldness, pale sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 Thus they have doubts that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of arrow wound is that without clear foam from the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if the arrow penetrates into the fleshy part of the buttocks, it is near the small intestines;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and spills a great amount of blood, causing severe pain and groaning;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 and they move all the limb joints in the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	When an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach, if it comes from the wound, then no part of the digested flesh is spared.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach and does not pierce any part of the intestines on its exit, there is no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if the arrow penetrates into the bladder, causing urine to leak and flow out, and the patient feels intense pain;
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 The wound appears to be fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as made by the fingers and knuckles and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and neck and thighs, and similar members are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the shaft is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisonous as I will tell you of how it happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 It happened to a man whose arrow struck the knee near its root.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I tried it, and injured it on the other side through the ear fat, but was not severely damaged.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And injured another joint with an arrow shot into the cheek's fat near the gum below it, and the arrowhead was pushed back out without piercing further than the tip towards the bone, and the arrowhead was large like one from a Turkish bow, easily fitting no ear.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The joint remained sound, and nothing adverse occurred to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 I injured an arrow from the throat near a Christian, and the arrowhead was Arabic-style with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I shaved the beard, and acted discreetly as long as it was necessary, and the Christians were safe.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And deceived an arrow into one of them, which was lodged in his belly, and believed he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and after it had been more than thirty days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut into the arrow shaft, manipulated it cleverly, and successfully deceived it, without any harmful incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And when I saw a man with an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound was swollen up on top of it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 and the arrow remained inside him, and did not affect his natural conditions or cause harm to any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And then I saw another man with an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was swoln up on top of it;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 Thus there will be great pain suffered similarly.
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And pierced by an arrow in the upper part of one's body among the nobles and king, which was located midway upward, and slightly inclined to the right.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 and the arrowhead was fully inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I went to treat it after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I enclosed it with all subtle techniques, and did not feel it at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 and there was no sensation or pain from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was the tip of the arrow and placed a soothing emollient ointment on top because his eyes were not swollen.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 And I appeared to have found the path of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I placed the embalmment in both hands and dried up the main wound, and the patient stayed thus for a long time until they felt the arrow within their body.
et il le me dist.	 And he told it to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I applied the medicinal acrid water to the wound by hand until it was opened, and tried closing it, and felt the arrowhead at its intended place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 then I secured the opening of the wound with that medicinal acrid water until the arrowhead appeared clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 and it passed through completely within four months, and then I loosened the wound so that I could insert pincers on both sides, but it couldn't be removed.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Then one must cease from subtle techniques and devices of anesthesia until it is firmly grasped in a day with well-made tongs, according to what its form will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat the wound, and return the injury.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And they judge that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I will reset it then, and the wound is firmly sealed, and the patient is completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 Now I have told you the quality of arrow extractions, so put your care on what I do not mention here, for the book cannot cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 but the wise master physician compares little about many things, and focuses on what is currently happening and failing; he provides nine works of knowledge and nine instruments for handling strange occurrences in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows come from limbs where they are embedded, according to two ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 or by their entry point, or from another direction;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and those that enter through the same opening they entered from are arrowheads in living flesh, and will do so again at no time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not come out now, leave it as long as the flesh is rotting around it and there is pus coming from the wound.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And similarly if it is embedded in bone and cannot come out, leave it as such for some days, changing its position each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And when it comes out, and if it does not come out, pierce all around with a very fine drill until the flesh is fully healed, then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 If the arrow is embedded in the skull bone and approaches one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the incidents I have openly described to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If not to draw it out immediately, but leave it until even after several days, for if the arrow reaches near the face, it is certain death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrow is not lodged solenly in the bone and does not reach the joint, and the patient experiences no major change for some days, then attempt to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed freely, then administer cauterization around it as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wound until it heals cleanly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if the arrow is lodged in the body and cannot be seen, then wrap the entire area completely.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 And if you can feel it, remove using any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 If you cannot widen the wound, and deepen the arrow's entry, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then bleed as much as the wound allows.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 And remove the arrow if you can, and if it has holes on both sides to which it is attached, then break or bend the stick that is firmly lodged in the two places that you are able to move, and then break or snap off the ends of the arrow shaft as much as possible.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And carefully do not break the arrow, pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, should the arrowhead be deeply embedded near its entrance, then draw it out, for extraction would be painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if the flow of blood is in a different direction, follow the treatment we have mentioned in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And guard the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a method as you would pull an arrow without danger, whether soon or later, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And place the patient as they were when the arrow fell upon them, for that is their greatest help, and if you cannot do so, then put them according to what signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow that comes from another direction or pierces something of theirs, or where the skin is swollen can be seen or felt distinctly.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 So cut accordingly as long as the pincers can grip it, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If it juts out now. (This line seems to be incomplete or missing
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if held within the bone, rotate your round hand so that it enters the bone, then widen the bone before extracting it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot come out, let it remain for now, then resume extraction until it comes out completely.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 and if the arrowhead remains in it, you must remove the entire shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 and if it breaks off, you should administer binding, and if the instrument is a knife, such that the tip of the arrow enters into the handle of the tool.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 and then remove it completely, and if the arrowhead is loose, place the instrument with its point inserted to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is contaminated, it is necessary to cut out all surrounding tissue where the poison resides, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if the arrowhead breaks or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is recent, you may cover up, as needed.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And be careful not to puncture the vein or nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and perform the treatment until it is healed completely.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many ways to do so:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowheads.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the pointed hair is also like the feather of a bird, to direct it towards the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pincers for both setting and retrieving:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of common bodily veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 There are veins to be opened that have XXXI in total, sixteen heads included, which are as follows:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 II jugulars located behind the ears, called the double "herbeck".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 and the two arteries that are visible in both temples.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 and two veins that are in the groins of both eyes, called "inspire".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 And the vein that lies within the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 and the vein that is at the temple, near the hairline;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 and the two temples which are on either side of the head;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are called "Egoheirich" veins.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins of which there are commonly five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 One is on the head, and it's to the left ribcage side, and they call it "the vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 The other is named "fast", and it's composed of the head and abdominal parts, and they call it by the local name "vein of the body".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The abdominal part is to the right ribcage side and they call it by the local name "vein of the belly", and it's below the navel, and this one where blood can be drawn, clearly shown at the top of the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the small vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two streams.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 And in the leg where there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 One is located below the hollow of the left breast bone, and the second (joint) which is at the ankle of the right leg.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 and the vein called "sne," which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 and in the other leg are three veins below those (joints).
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The sting from the veins that are after the ears can cause old headaches and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 and the quality of this sting, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient, and rub the area or veins with a coarse cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 then tighten the neck of the patient with a winding motion until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places above the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 When you find the knots on your fingers, and where you feel hairs under your finger, beware of them.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lancet and puncture from under the vein to the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire vein, and cut and remove the skin and vein clean until you see blood.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then strain it tightly, as long as it is cleansed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The cleaning of the two arteries that are in both temples should be done with an ancient, hardened, and accustomed practice for tears from the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the quality of the surgeon is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it must be that the patient keeps his head distant, until both veins are clearly visible.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and feels pain from under your elbow, then securely tie (a tourniquet).
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then lift the skin above your elbow to the second level of your elbow, and place the lance below it, then lift the vein up, and cover it, just as you did with two other veins, and control the bleeding according to necessity.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 then lay the patient down, and place your elbow over the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 and bandage firmly, leaving it until healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 And we have discussed this in their care and extraction, which begins the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The bandage of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as that for headaches from ancient face diseases, and migraines, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 And its quality is such that the patient should turn his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 Then take the instrument called "Fossor", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place its tip on the vein, and pierce under your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is neither slanted nor bent at a wide angle of the flesh.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 However, it must not be too tight;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And the ligament across it, for the bone is close by, and sometimes it breaks the membranes when they are delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The ligaments of the veins that are in the joints should be supported with bandages and to the tendon, redness, yellowness, and swelling in oil, and illnesses of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 And the quality of these ligaments is that the patient twists their neck by pulling at any attachment, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then the bandage and be sure to have the ligament across it, a little long and wide membrane, for there is no irritation.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the membranes are delicate, they may sometimes break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then let there be sufficient bloodletting as needed, and then apply linen, and secure it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The vein of the nose if it becomes congested should be treated with cold water and soothing ointments, as well as face ailments such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when they are longstanding.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 The quality of the congestion is such that it causes the patient's neck to be strained. Then straighten its nose with your left hand and take a long, fine thread through between the two nostrils, as the vein does not open easily, so the blood will begin to flow immediately.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And do not pull too hard initially, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then tie it off for a night, as it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 And this is the form of a blowfly
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The straining of the sinews assists in extending ligaments, and at the beginning of leprosy, as well as many other diseases, scabs, corrosion, herpes, and itching.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 and the quality of straining is that it pulls away the patient's neck from both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 and the master stands over the patient's head, then slices slightly on both sides, then straighten the vein a bit widely, then quickly cut the blood as needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 Then make another incision on the other vein, then loosen the ligaments, and strain both veins moderately so that the patient does not become strangled.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And let it remain until morning, so that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the liver inflammation
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of vein lips above contributes to wounds in the mouth, and decay of gums, and tears of lips, and ulcers and abscesses.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And the nature of the healing is for you to seat the patient before you and hold his neck as I have instructed.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one is in the right lip and the other in the left, and recognize them by what they are black, and by the small black veins surrounding them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 So then cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them, or you are in doubt, cut the larger one from each side, and likewise for all veins above and below, because they are of a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 for inflammation underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The healing of the veins below the tongue helps after the cerebral healing, and it is during the extension of the throat, and for eye diseases and mouth ailments. (Note: This line might contain typographical errors or be difficult to translate due to historical medical terminology not aligning with modern understanding.)
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 And the quality of the saigner is that the patient bleeds between their hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down either side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Now clean both, and do not cut too deep, as from there are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins of the arm that are commonly bled have two methods of practice:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 or by poking through all along with a wide lancet blade, or olive oil subtly as sharp cutters are called "anise.";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 And they are wide and subtle according to the breadth and length of the veins.;
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the wormwood is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 It is necessary to open plain-haired veins with abundant visible blood that contains thick and turbid blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And this is the form of the olive bile.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and are more subtly pointed, and suitable for tying up fine veins where there is subtle lemon-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The saintliness of the basilica, which is one of these veins, assists in diseases that are from the throat, and neck, and groin, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And it is fitting for the physician to bleed properly, and that he washes from the artery which is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if it comes out of the artery, and a stream of blood flows, then he should staunch it as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And the bile must not be sharp but cut evenly as I mentioned.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the vein does not open clearly, then one should extract it and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 or you want any hair from it, or bleed into the vein within its arm.
elle apert manifestement;	 It becomes clearly apparent;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 and the sore at the nape of the neck as we have mentioned.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you see the lie of the sinew, then as I say, when you raise the arm, gently touch the head until you recognize the hairs.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 then sign your name at the top of the parchment and then lift the arm, treat the vein at the nape of the neck.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 and be careful not to injure the artery when you see the head swelling, for it is the artery:
eschui la donques.	 flee then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see it bulging as well like the urine of a child, and the flesh is red and tender, know that this is from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Quickly proceed, then place your hand underneath for a while, and afterwards straighten out the arm which is bent. This often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 ties the arm together, and leaves it like that, so the patient does not move it.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And there is fear of death, so do not move until he is well again.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the arm is not straightened out and it heals, and there are no medicines provided, then cut the artery in case of rupture, as they retract.
et estainche li sans.	 and straighten the arm.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And take a piece of willow bark, break it, and choose one half to tie up securely until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 if the arm is straightened out properly, that's good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 If this does not work, apply the treatment with powders that coagulate blood as we have said.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And the coagulation is not always in various positions due to the slight location of the wound and the strength of the joints on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The action of the vein is such that it transports blood above and below, because it consists of the basilic and cephalic vessels, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 And it is necessary for the physician to examine below the nerve, and if too much pressure is applied, then the nerve can be damaged, causing swelling and severe pain, and sometimes cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve can be found many times, and if it is not in any places due to its subtlety, one must explore with the dilator instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 And escape the nerve at your will.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is blood between the two veins, it flows for a long time.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The heating of the skull helps to draw blood towards the head and benefits the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is proper to heat by touching the area of the olive or myrtle fruit, as it's the safest among all treatments because there are no nerves or arteries there.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 However, you must choose the lightest one to apply and do not put anything if it's the first time, then repeat.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And sometimes it causes swelling in some men when applied for the first time, but it does not harm them.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of this disease is according to what you think.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you must know about heating is that it's not performed just to maintain health but also to avoid future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And there is to be made a suture on one of the three veins present.
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 that is, namely the cephalic, saphenous, and basilica.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And it should be sutured at the beginning of pre-prandial fasting and in autumn and winter after eating when signs of repletion appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 And it should be sutured on the first day or third, after two to three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The suture applied for diseases has no fixed time, but when needed it is by day or night, at all hours and times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And one should not suture children until 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not let them exercise too much if they are old men who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And when anyone wishes to purge themselves in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a mild enema, if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw the excess from the intestines which could harm the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 Nor should those who are too greedy on meats nor drunkards, no matter how much they are so, or have dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 and one should purge after an attack of colic, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent intercourse with a woman or traveling, staying up late and conjugal relations, and whatever the rest, whether by something from weapons or the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then subtly manage the humors, if they are large, through meats, drinks, and medicines, if you have permission to do so.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then enter a bath if nothing prevents it, to subtly manage the blood and cleanse the vein near the wound.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And keep clear of work, pain, leisure, and such things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 And be tied and raised, and let the healer stand higher than the patient being treated, then rub the arm two or three times, and then stretch out the ligaments moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct the humors.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 Then rub his entire body with hands until the veins become inflamed and are felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then moisten the muscles with a bit of old oil, then place your thumb from your left hand over that vein below the wound at the spot you wish to move it so that the vein does not slip and stick to the blade.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 For there are veins that escape like cords in the muscles, and some with such flatness from swelling, so when placed over the flesh, they retract into themselves, and cannot open up, thus these people suffer.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if the vein is opened, then the wound may be too narrow, so it must be that the surgeon is knowledgeable in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the vein works on the first attempt, this is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 If not so, then begin again from a little further below where it was last set if the joint is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 If the joint is swollen and the patient fears it, leave for one or two days, but do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 Perhaps an abscess will develop there later on;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 Do not bathe or immerse it and then resume the cure if he wishes to do so.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 And if the passage is small or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not amount to as much blood as you see, then pinch it at the same place all along.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 And touch a little gently, so that the joint becomes swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 Because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the location swoln, do not begin anew with a saignée, and apply some egg yolk oil there, as it lightens their body's blood, and softens in this place the lye with the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And thus administer the egg yolk oil to each saignée where you sever veins, in order to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 and do likewise with triacle and bowels, when it is placed upon the location.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 if delicately, the lye separates and splits as soon as it becomes too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if there comes an abscess often, especially when it is not properly drained only at that time or the opening of the vein is small, hurry and place on the location a damp sponge in water and oil with some heat, and hold for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And it is necessary that you then do this after the blood flow of the vein has stopped, and if it remains in place for some days without blackness or greenish discoloration, there is no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see, apply any substance of olive oil or myrrh diluted in warm water, along with a charm or similar object.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And often there occurs an abscess and appearance near the site of the bladder.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 So then place your hand upon it, and if you feel the area becoming swollen with pressure from your hand, that is an unfavorable appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Then be sure not to place anything as we have mentioned, for there may be risk of striking an artery without realizing.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But make an incision dry to harden the joint, then treat it with further treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each medicine according to the quantity and color of its virtue in the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 For if blood is black, let it drain out until it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 and if you see a large one, allow it to be drained until it becomes thinned.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And this applies to those who are flat and broad, and require blood extraction, then make the wound wider with broader slits;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 and for those who are weak, do the opposite, support them gently and often, and when supporting it should be done at a slant rather than by pressing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 This manner of injury is free from blood flow issues and nerve impingement, and it moves as if the limb were neither long nor wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And for those whose body needs to be in bed rest, one should give them fine flour bread soaked in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If he is feverish, wash three times or four; and if of cold complexion, serve fine flour bread soaked in syrup with mead, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, and sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If it is swollen with blood after the loss of much blood, then one should give him a broth of charcoal, and an aromatic syrup, and use other remedeby which we have spoken in the section on fainting, for evacuating blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if one wishes to drain the arm veins or treat elsewhere when it is greatly swollen from blood loss, they should bleed slowly and continuously according to the amount of its potency.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	et s, by the so pleis an t and; and:
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if you wish to heal another area, it must be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 Because there is much blood within the body that has become feverish, and it brings about fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 If it becomes necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as possible.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 Then you ensure all the wound's conditions are cleaned, and place your hand over the hair when it heals, so that death does not come to the opening, which often happens if the wounds are neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it is not necessary when you see dislocating the arm and blood issuing a second time, to keep the opening closed, but instead apply pressure around.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 If it's a fracture, extend the arm quickly, as that would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 But let it heal until it does so a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 Or you do not touch the tip of the lancet, until the blood that has been expelled from the vein ceases and you put some bandage back on it gently, and apply light pressure.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if bleeding is needed a second time, let the blood flow to the same place or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	which painful and.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the method of anointing is such that the patient places their hand in hot water until the needle turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 Then one should bind it moderately, so that the vein appears well, then anoint across and not too wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 and the needle should be wide, and anointed well near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it, then place the hand in hot water and let blood into the water until there is enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And if this happens, do not place the hand in hot water again, for it will be done more often in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And this anointing of this vein is more effective than all other treatments, as there are no vessels or nerves within it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The fat of the salvatelle of the right hand is suitable for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 squeeze the hand and pour hot water into it until the veins are visible if seen.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 and take the fat across, and cut a piece large enough for all, as long as nothing is wasted.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 and do not take too much at once, for the nerves are close together without separation, then put the hand back in hot water if any blood is frozen in the wound, which cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the bleeding as much as is necessary, apply oil and wool to the vein so that it can be quickly healed, doing this for each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	; you maye:Tud:t; the same and then that is c. The 1: don master they can le Otre toha vie (O contcur� su cesse est paire;
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The treatment of the Sophene is suitable for all diseases that arise from within the body, such as bone marrow ailments, retention of fluids, kidney disease, and old conditions of hips, thighs, and legs, among similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of the fat is such that the patient puts some stone in hot water, and rubs it on the veins until they wear away, then places it over the joint where the stone was.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 And the veins are near the ankle, with many roots extending above the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 Cleanse and ensure it is dry or larger in size, at the ankle, to prevent movement.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you cleanse above the foot, watch for nerves exposed therein, and the veins cut as when shaving.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And ensure it is smoothly healed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot flow out, reset the foot in water, and let the vein empty completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And if the veins need to be cleansed for the first time, start again within a bit, as the wound is sore.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do similarly with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The source of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to heat.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of its cleansing is such that the patient must enter or bathe, and elevate above the aneble IV fingers by twisting, otherwise it does not open the veins.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 And if it opens, so heal in all ways you can see, and through.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And use methods to cover it, for the head is loose, and it has risen greatly on the hands of mankind.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you do not heal it, then use any remedy that opens or closes the wound and around both sides of the small finger, and protect from the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 And apply enough healing as you see, then loosen the bandage, and put on cotton and fasten it tightly.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 Removal of pus-filled abscesses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Vents are made of horns, or glasses, or vermilion.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 And the procedure is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 By striking and drawing blood, or feeling struck.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this inflammation which causes a feeling of being struck occurs in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 Or it is with great heat, or feels like fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 And inflammation that occurs by striking and blood extraction happens in fourteen parts of the body, so one is completely at the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 And the other is near the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 And two others are in the ribs of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 And the inflammation below the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 And the inflammaturities of both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 And the inflammations over the heels.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 And the inflammations within both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 And the inflammations in both legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 And the inflammations at both ankles.
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 And the bleeding does not produce much blood, but from tiny veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not bother anyone, as with normal vein bleeding.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And it does not require any treatment, nor heat or cold application, in no disease that arises from excessive eating, as long as all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And if it is necessary due to diseases or habits, we provide each injection at the beginning or end of the month, and before and after every hour.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 because there are those who, when they need injections, feel heavy sensations;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 and for those who experience fullness and reddening on their face, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 When such things happen where they encounter a drop of blood on their tongue, causing it to swell and spill blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if there are those who think about it, seeing near the painful and deadly aspects of such things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	the or ent chir plowed with bleus is not to them and, then s't and it if you so, but the paints in them et de that are, ici les peche l'on est.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The healing of the moisture helps with the pain in the head ... which comes to them, and it is not necessary that this be after removing all from the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 And this purging is for the healing of the headache, and it should not be used by those who are naturally cold, or have catarrh, as they suffer greatly from it.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And therefore it is not appropriate for them to use vinegar.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who suffer from it often become lazy, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply the poultice slightly lower down due to fear of inefficacy.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 The ventosation within the neck is at the level of the cervical spine and basilica, and for this reason it extends to the body of the spermatic cord, and splitting of the channel of the peritoneum, and all parts, and filling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 And it should not be pushed too firmly, for if held too tightly, it may cause displacement or distension of the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 Ventosation of the two ribs in the neck causes pain in the head, otalgia and migraine, strangulation, and pain at the root of the teeth, and is at the level of the cervical spine.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And it should be commanded that the nurse express his hand in insertion without cutting the artery and causing bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 The dryness of the mouth below the chin is due to oral disease, and decay of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And there is an excessive flow from the sores on both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation of the shoulders is a disease arising from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The dryness of the corners is as much like that of three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 and instruct the glands not to secrete too much at first, for the core is still tender, and it consists of nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The sore that is on the buttocks is like hemorrhoids at the base, and diseases of the area, and it must be large blisters, made from flax, which need to be well drained.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And perhaps, if subtle, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 and it causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The leg veins become swollen easily because they draw blood from the whole body and are effective against ancient pains of the head, joints, bones, and bladder;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 And they are in place of the two hips and the two ankles, but generally weaken the body after prolonged use, causing swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The way to apply the ventose is that you put it in a hollow spot quickly and do so promptly, placing it hastily, moving equally, and continuing this action until you see the area turn red and swell, and blood appears slightly.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then, apply heat, and reset the cupping glasses, and carefully observe the position of the limbs, for there are those who have severe cholera, and clear discharges.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 If it is necessary to make an incision, one must make wide and deep ones;
et suce legierement.	 And squeeze gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the patient is large, it is fitting to make two incisions:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time to facilitate the passage of much blood;
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the patient is very thin, it is fitting to make a third incision;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we wish to draw out little blood at a time, we do so only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want much blood, let us repeat often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if the patient is thin, apply heat thoroughly, and for those with thick and hard skin and susceptible to bruises, you should warm the lids of the cupping glasses with an aperitive and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 If it is so, use olive oil of a certain type, or almond soft oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if it is so, use watercress oil, or of lily, or chamomile, or similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if for the one you are treating with a tender and broad bandage, do not put any oil on it, but after ventosation with rosewater, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd juice, or pearl ash solution, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should rise easily, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those who have excessive swelling rise with old wine, or of boiled watercress, or of anise or chamomile infusion, or similar substances.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 and they must not be saunaed before the bath nor after the bath but one hour to two hours later.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 and should not sleep after saunaing, and it is necessary that they sweat, when they need to be saunaed and once they are saunaed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And watch for those who are pale from cholera, and whose skin is too dry and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 If it becomes necessary, they should take cold things such as red apples, endives, lettuces and similar items.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 and mild spices, and lamb fat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And those with a cold disposition should take honey syrup, and moderately aged wine, along with some spices, mild spices, small birds, and partridge.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 and on the day they exercise, should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 and it is advisable to give certain individuals neither triacle nor musk before or after vomiting to strengthen the main body parts.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 Be subtle with them, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The cupping that is applied without causing injury are those placed over the liver, and joints, and gout, and abdomen, buttocks, legs, and groin, because these limbs do not tolerate being pierced or punctured anywhere, it is only done to draw blood from one part of the body to another, as we place on wounds when they are healing.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 for removing swelling that is in the limb, as we apply cupping to the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 and alleviate pain when there is edema or stones, and remove them by its attractive property, possibly removing the edema or returning the stone to its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And so it is done when placing over the liver and kidney where there is retained wind-swelling, and these blisters are prepared empty to drain as needed.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And never are they prepared together with fire, nor with plain water as in some diseases of the chest, and thusly you fill the blister with hot water poultice or with water that has boiled medicinal herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form for administering a cauterizing agent is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And it should have two sides each half a palm wide and with a tiny puncture within the center like to piercing with a needle, made of silver before so that it does not harm the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 And have at hand a rod of crossbow or iron to insert a candlewick while they are large and small depending on the diseases and condition of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 because children's cupping is different from that for adults, and for thin individuals as opposed to fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And so one must place this cupping on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 take the candle of wax or lubricant and place it inside the cupping over the rod that is also within the cupping, so that the light shines to the bottom of the cupping without burning the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 and then place it on the limb, and you should do so at the points we have mentioned, so that when desired, steam will form, and remove the cupping.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And you take the lining as before, and often it recurrences if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the ventouse used for treating pleurisy, which is filled with water at once, has neither penis nor outlet, and is only managed when full of water, and placed on the limb fully.
et c’est li forme:	 And it is formed as follows:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Suction cups are managed only where you cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, for example.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 And on the heels of horses, whether hooves or nails, and others like them;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 And its quality is such that when you find those without stains which are in soft clear waters with some slime, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 and place them into a clean, soft water source until they become accustomed to it, and have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 then make them safe from veins and pus, then rub the member until it is reddened, and place the previously cleaned stones there.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 and when they have sunk and settled, if it is possible to place them near an outlet, then do so, for this is highly beneficial afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, raise it easily and then expose to water very well, and then squeeze out the liquid.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 If too much blood is left in the body after removing the stones, then wipe with a linen cloth dipped in cold water and place it there until the stone has been squeezed out.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 If there are multiple abscesses, apply crushed vitriol or galewacke, and similar substances, until they are healed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Or place it on the middle of scraped fleshe, and leave them until they have healed at the lee, now seal.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if you need more remedy, then take other substances.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the substances do not take effect, then rub the flesh with fresh blood or place a needle until the abscess comes out, and then apply them to it, and soon as they feel the blood, let them heal.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they bleed, then powder with a bit of aloe and sea salt, or ash, so they will now heal.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and involve the restoration of breaks and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Learn well, dear student, that the foolish do not delve into this chapter's wisdom, for they have never seen any ancient books or read their letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 and therefore, knowledge is scarce in our land, as I've found no good examples of it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 and I know little about it, though through the wisdom of ancient books which I have studied thoroughly, by experience, and from my life's habits.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 and I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, shortened at the end, and clearly shown the forms of inflammations that are produced, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary therefore that we say here the preface of this book containing the essence and chapters in which the sage applies his understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that when any breakage or dislocation, twisting, or contortion occurs in a limb, you must support the injured side of the patient with parts weak due to childhood, age, or frailty.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 If the tension is not too much, or too cold.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 And mixing with cold things, that is to say, cold baths, and fodder for birds and horses, do not drink wine or eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much on foods that fill the veins with blood, until you no longer have doubt of a hot abscess or material spreading in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 If it comes to the patient being so weakened again that they cannot be governed as before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote nourishment, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, barley, sheep's stomach, eggs, fresh fish, rich wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For proper nourishment allows for faster healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well healed or united according to their nature for limb strengthening, nor those as tender as children's bones.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 But do not worry, reset above the broken bone with strong ligaments that join the limb together, until it is restored as if it were before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And do not finish all of your work, and for this reason you should nourish on large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a head fracture is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that occur from dislocation, and others by being bent, as with the breaking of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a crack throughout a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And each method has its means, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings in that place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 And is known the fracture of the bone by what the twist is present, and opened widely due to force, and it presses near the palm.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And when there is no twist or touching of it, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 However, it may well have twisting, or splitting, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	the in sone de pru;
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And know that the fractures which curve upward, and are two parts dislocated, they must now be aligned evenly, so as to abscesses when they arise.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 and if abscesses occur, leave it for no day until the abscess is eased.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 then make it even with movements that you can lightly and easily perform, knowing that its restoration is easier than those of others where there are missing pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 then straighten it if necessary afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 And if the bone has broken pieces, and is separated into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or on your hand, if it's small limbs, or at II tendons, or at one tendon and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 And place the member according to its natural shape, so that when parts of the injured limb are dislocated, you reset them by any means necessary and guide it back into position as best as you can, ensuring that through your work no injury or pain befalls the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And properly set the two ends of the bones according to their best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And if you feel that it does not heal well with your hand, then... (Please provide additional context or text for continuation)
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If the dressing is done well and do not strain it too much, nor compress as those who cause abscesses to boil and contract in their limbs, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the limb is at risk of infection, so treat the patient well to ensure it does not move, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning or otherwise. (Note: It seems there might be a missing part of the text here for proper continuation)
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And ensure the limb is so securely fixed that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For when it feels no pain, not even slightly, and then it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 and ensure that it is placed correctly, so that any twisting does not occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 and the quality of the broken limb depends as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Seek knowledge that broken limbs vary in minor and major ways, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members, such as fingers and toes:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 If necessary, wrap soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 and those that are large, like thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 if it is necessary to bind with a wide and sturdy bandage, as the wide bandages can encompass the entire large limb evenly, without any unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 then place three or four light pads (or as needed depending on the limb), and tie one end to the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and make it tighter there than at the break, moving away slightly from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 and soften the bandage a little at a time until you cover most of the healthy part again, then take another bandage and wrap around directly above the fracture site.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 Then return to the part below the fracture and strain it gently, not too hard or weakly, as we have said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then place between the splints linen or cloth so that they are all equal, then bind it above with bandages, and then put well-made supports underneath if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is an abscess or swelling, then place something soothing on the abscess and that removes the swelling, leaving it as such for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Then strain the supports and make pads of a piece about one hand's breadth thick, or of wood used for making shingles, or of palm fronds, according to this pattern:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 But it is necessary for the stake that someone places on the fracture to be a bit larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 and so long as needed for the member's smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then fasten the stakes in the same way as you did with the first fracture, and later over time, using a thread as in the initial treatment of the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 the tighter it is, the less there will be;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and it should be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 because if the thread is too thick as I have seen in works of folks who make their rope cords from twisted flax threads, and it's a significant error, for the fracture cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it should not have less than two inches between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the head of an extremity after it has been tightened into its proper place, then apply linen or cotton padding under them so they do not slip.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, I will describe the treatment for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And remember that it is not necessary to extract all fractured bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 When the limb is large, one must not put staves unless after five or seven days, or more depending on the risk of abscess occurring soon.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 and here is the method of ancient eyebolts to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And take some flour that is held within the walls of the mill, and knead it with abundance of eggs, and use this concoction which should not be too clear or too thick; this is the common method for an eyebolt restoring a break in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another way of applying a dressing that heals breaks, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take oil of aloes, myrrh, nutsgrass juice, arabic gum, and honey, about 12 drachms.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Myrrh and aloes, about 5 drachms.
alechil VIIII З.;	 Alethinon (or another suitable astringent) VIIII drach
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 And make the powder, and mix with honey and egg white.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 If the body's constitution is hot, utilize this plaster as it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another form of plaster useful for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Take muscat and wormwood, soaked in strong wine.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Myrrh and aloes, also infused with the same amount of wine as before (IX being a Roman numeral for 
acaice VI З.;	 Acacia and frankincense, likewise infused.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Armenian balsam (X liters), finely ground and mixed with either water or milk, to be administered.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another form of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their place, alleviates acute pain, and is used to cut the bone, with fractures being addressed.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new linen, and soak it with ease and oil cooked, and place it at the location.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These dressings do not restore, but are beneficial for cooling of abscesses and properly soothing the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another method to mend broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, mix them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method for dressing to restore bone fractures and ease remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take wormwood root, chamomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour, each one in equal parts;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 and grind it up, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, then apply with fresh coriander water or plain water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way to treat more effectively than the first, when an abscess comes with member restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take wormwood roots, flax seeds, balm, melilotus (sweet clover), and senna, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 And it is bruised, and concocted with salt water or soft water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not place anything above the broken limb to promote healing except a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests placing dry and slightly warm substances on the broken limb to promote healing, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Other way of dressing appropriate for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Take musk and chervil from chopped men's nether regions or bird feathers, wormwood, and saffron in equal amounts; grind them up and make a plaster with it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 And then leave the dressing on for some time, and be cautious that the patient feels no pain or has moved any bones in their place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 If not removed after a few days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if pain comes to the place or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling occurs, hurry, remove the dressing and take off the plaster now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 And take light cloth, and sponge of sea water moistened, and immerse it in clear water, and raise the place where the pain exists, until the itching ceases and the pain is eased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry cloth wrung in clear water or rose oil and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 And rest the swelling of the limb and ease its pain, then resume subtle manipulation and a bit of opium, but do not bind it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And proceed delicately until it is safe.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and painful and swollen throughout the limb, and you need opium and ligature, then proceed as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it unless after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 And never leave it XX days, as one sees, until the breaker is ready, and approach the shoulder joint above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 Then initially reset again, and the injured area swells with flesh, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 And if you see it drying more than necessary, know that infections cannot come there.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Then the patient must take warm water baths whenever you release it, and do so every day, and wash a little more frequently.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 Through this treatment thus prevent infections on the member and quickly heal what foolish doctors have done, returning the limb incorrectly.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 It is wrong and such actions are fearsome; I see nothing else but laziness and working improperly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	In various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 Many ways of fractures are, with diverse shapes, and their causes distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 because there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the bone splits through all the bone up to its facet which is from under the bone, as if it were an axe or club.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 and therefore this kind of fracture is called "axing".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or the sword cuts through the bone from above, and this type of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 and there are wounds from these large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow, or split or crack of stone-like bone, or falling on stone, or other such things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is persistent bleeding, which reaches up to the tela under the bone, or above it, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if there is a wound that fills the bone as subtly as hairs, and it is a small crack, and therefore this type of fracture is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 And if the wound is made by being struck with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, and allows entry of the bone shard, making the head appear as hot crossbows do when fired on their targets.
si entre li piere dedens.	 If within the flesh beneath.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And it happens more in those who have bones underneath that are as soft as an infant's skull;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 And occurs in all these ways of fractures where small pieces are dislocated as such.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And I shall speak of them right there.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of fractures by distraction upon them, and examination with probes, and through the corrupted cartilage that is beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is known by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed well over it; thus there appears black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a breakage, beware if any unfortunate incident occurs with the patient; and if you see no evil event like vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, palpitations, fever ague, eyes exiting forcefully and reddening, and other such manifestations in various dispositions, do not heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no hopeless incident, and expect a remedy, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone by the fourteenth day when the moon can be seen.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone by the seventh day before the fleshing around the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone fracture comes near the cloth that covers the brain, it is necessary to split the broken part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 and it is that you grasp the wounded head, expose over the bone in all ways you can, and on top of the wound's shape as gently as possible, if bleeding occurs upon exposing the bone or abscesses appear, then aid with whatever is needed, and ensure the cavity is filled with wrung cloth soaked in oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 and let the wound rest until all abscesses are eased, and be sure that bleeding ceases;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two methods of operation.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 One method involves cutting a narrow section in front, thus shaping it as follows:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second method is to have various cuts, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of different iron types.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 and work lightly, not cutting into the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 And if the bone is tough and hard, it must be pierced all around, as you make cuts with chisels, not perforating beyond the outer layer of the bone. There should be a margin or circle above the tip that does not allow the point to go through the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 And you must have several tools so that each comes in its place for the examination of the bone, and you will have tongs for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 This is the form of the three kinds of tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality for probing around the broken bone is to place one tongs on the bone and turn it with both hands until you know that the bone has been cut.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 Then place the tongs elsewhere for a while, and do so all around it, then cut into the space between the fragments with incisors. Do this more delicately than possible, gently, as we have said, until you can feel the bone at your hand or on any of the tools that you hold like pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 And ensure you do not touch the brain or the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 And when you have broken the bone and exposed it, if necessary to resect the protruding part of the bone that is attached to any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be much finer and more delicate than the other chisel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 and if there is nothing of small bones or scales remaining, then lightly rub with the appropriate instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And another way of treatment is what Galen prescribes, which is more subtle;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 and it should be done strongly, as he says.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you must expose a part of the bone where the break is most open. Once you have exposed that part, place the pointed end of this lenticular chisel on it as follows.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And do not cut deeply on one side, and it is a swollen area on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 Then with a small mallet underneath, so that you gently strike the bone entirely through it, and be careful of the sinew that is above.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 If it is loose to the bone, strike the bone gently, for striking too hard can cause harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the skin and the bone is cut slightly above it so that there are small pieces, then you should treat the severity accordingly, and remove scales with a fine razor of which you must have various quantities in order to administer at each place what is most beneficial according to the work done and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have many coarse razors and finer ones after that, continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of these hair-cutting techniques and subtle fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its specific condition.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 And this is something that cannot be taught to those who have not devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the sinew is exposed, it is necessary to take a bandage of lin cloth according to the amount of wound, and soak in oil rose water, and apply over the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, and moisten with wine and oil, and place it on the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 And do so more gently as you can, not burdening the patient's neck, then administer underneath it the ligature, and only tighten enough to just cover the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove it, and apply medicines as with lily roots, and barley flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and such things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And make a powder from these things, and place on the wound, then apply remedies without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 Ensure the wound remains clean and do not leave any pus or allow it to fester with bowels, for when bowels gather on the brain's cloth, they cause harm and great distress.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 Because if one places something sharp upon a wound, it must be cauterized above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore be cautious; if by chance something happens to the patient as we have said, it is uncertain and without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if darkness does not occur from the medicine applied, ensure it has potency; then you must take a piece of honey and mix three parts with rosy oil and one part woolen cloth, and apply it to the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then proceed with appropriate treatment methods until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Remember that no time should the two parts of the neck above be broken or twisted, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And those which are dislocated are cartilaginous, and do not break or cause entrapment or twisting, and then they heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must push your small finger or thumbnail into it, making an equal break inside the index finger joint, and along the hinge backwards until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do this gently, so that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee and cannot bring the foot to its place, it should be set level with a thin stick slightly thicker than usual.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 And if it is a break of two parts, do likewise and hasten to restore the first day, if you know how.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the seventh or next day, when the swelling of the puncture has calmed down, then push at the tip of the nail with a fine linen cloth if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 When you bind another from the other side, if there is a breakage there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And they are tented so large that they fill the windows with their presence.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some healers say you must grind down the stings with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem to me entirely good, but it is necessary that they be made of wool and egg whites, and powdered mill.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hardened, and the cartilage stiffened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And never blow into the nose or eyes near these tents, and if there is a small vein present, and it holds the breakage, and blows on the patient's pain.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 Or do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	When an abscess occurs near the eye as you work on it, place beeswax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a drop of diaperin.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And if there are no abscesses forming, then apply plaster afterwards using fine flour, and powdered incense, mixed with egg whites, then place light gauze on it, but do not tie the nose or eyes.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 If the break of the nose is small and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract with suitable tissues, then cut the fracture, and treat various complex wounds and injuries, as appropriate poultices and ointments for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If there is no wound on the nose and it has been treated with bandages, apply pledgets soaked in liquid until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	For dislocation of the jawbone.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there are no wounds nearby, and the fractures are minimal, so that it's not broken in two, but rather splintered within, if one can notice this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, to insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 And if the breakage is on the left jawbone, insert your index finger from your right hand into it and gently press the fracture back in place with that hand, while supporting with the other hand evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced on two sides, it is necessary to arrange for an equal extension on both parts.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 If movements of the teeth occur, or grinding, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and place on a broken jaw cerate, and place under a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And place the great splint well made upon it, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it under the movements you can see, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the shape changes, then reset it every day, and then put back what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 And place poultice on it, with fine-ground powder or meal flour from sesame seeds, after you have removed the cerate.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And place a light bandage over the cast, and if the cast swells, and the patient's position does not change, leave it until healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 Many times is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, arrange as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a fracture and wound together, be sure no part of the bone has broken through;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 If subtly into the flesh near it.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it as necessary according to your discretion.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have set all the bones in place and they do not move out of position, if the wound is wide, cover with one or two bandages to support healing until it has fully mended.
de la forcele	To strengthen and fortify.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The severe fractures many times before, toward the shoulder, and the fractures are as follows in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 or it is broken and displaced into two parts, and there are fragments, and it is easier to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And such works are when there is broken bone without wound, so have two assistants, one to treat the dislocated shoulder that feels weakened.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and the other stretches the neck towards the injured area.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 then set the fracture with your hands, so that it forms as it should, and there is neither visible deformity nor instability.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend further, place a round rod of cloth or leather under the patient's shoulder as needed, and make it thick according to necessity.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 and elevate and relieve the limb, holding the rod in your hand to ensure the fracture is aligned as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the fractured limb towards the back because it comes out frontwards, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their stomach, and place half an earthenware pot under the shoulder, with the assistants lifting the shoulder while keeping pressure until the bone in the fractured limb rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 And then bring the fracture towards your hands, and if you find fragments, cut beneath them as needed.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 And pull gently on the fragments if the bone cannot be joined by any splinting; and wrap with one of the bandages that you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 but use a tourniquet for this instrument to prevent bleeding:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 and make it into a cup shape, not pointed, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the hand:
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 and have two handles, as you see fit, one wide and the other narrow, corresponding to the shape of the wound you created when setting the bones:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the shape is small or you doubt it being hot, use a bandage and gauze as needed according to its quantity:
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	When abscesses occur there, apply a cloth soaked in oil with roselle and spices, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 When the breaking of a bone is sensed with wounds and splinters, place plaster powder from finely ground mill on it, add egg yolk, and apply light gauze pieces over, and put a stick underneath the bandage if needed.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide strip measuring one palm in width, then put on two layers of bandages above the gauze and plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a subtle stick measuring three fingers in width and length, and wrap the entire bandage around it, ensuring that the top of the bandage remains taut.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the stick over the fracture, then turn the bandage at the shoulder, and under a healthy lower joint, and under an injured lower joint.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And the reset of each part, and when you see that the joint holds the fracture immediately, and you clearly see that the splinter does not move over the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligaments are relaxed, hold it in place.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow under their shoulder to lift the dislocated joint upward.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 If you lighten the strain of the fracture by aligning the shoulder or tying the arm to the neck, and that it does not come off improperly until twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then resume the splint if it is needed, and hold and leave it so until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And it is restored within at most 28 days, and sooner for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of a shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 Occasionally the shoulder breaks or dislocates out of place, and it cannot be moved except by touching it.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 if you set the fracture according to its pattern, and reset the limb in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 then apply powdered lime with plenty of egg whites on it, and lay a light gauze over it.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 then place a wide and fine bandage that is slightly wider than the shoulder, and if from the bandage there are gaps anywhere in the shoulder area, fill those spaces with lime starch.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 And then strain it firmly for a long while so that it does not move from its place, and monitor the ligaments each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And every time it swells, strain and make the bone equal if it is out of its place, and lift the patient on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 And the shoulder may be restored in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when this number is fulfilled, release it gently and support it, for it is not the bone that repositions itself lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes but not from the skin, and it becomes swolebed, and there is inflammation, then follow what we have said in the treatment for an abscess to relieve discomfort quickly.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the fracture of the thigh bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The flesh is never torn apart entirely, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken inside, if it leans to one side, the patient feels great pain, weakness, heat, and perhaps vomits blood, with fractures in the bones that have been shattered, and he feels very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and you place I cushions between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and articulate the ribs with your hands using II methods as possible until the shape of the bone is correct.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 Then place splints and plugs over the subtle bone of salt, or any other light material, and wrap it in a bandage so that nothing moves against the broken bone.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 and turn the ligature round to the back, adjust for comfort, and reward each hour of rest, and if it loosens, then tighten again.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, or pain or an abscess arises quickly, then untie it, remove the splint, and address whoever has come with methods of healing.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then replace the splint and tighten as necessary to ensure stability.
de la brisure des costes	For a broken rib fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Acknowledge that rib fractures occur mainly on the outside after the back and within at the top, and they do not bend easily because they are brittle.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 And it feels well to the touch near the joints of the arms.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the mending is such that you make the break equal as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then apply a cast, and use a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if rib fractures are descending inside, the patient feels intense pain and numbness, much like with suffocation, because the bone is exposed.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 and there are lumps, swelling, and excessive bleeding of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients have applied significant remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And some say it is proper to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to push out the breach.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make it so that abscesses are formed within if they have not come already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If it has occurred there, if the joint is healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And some say that one should apply cups on the outside to draw out fluids, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 Nevertheless, there is doubt as to whether the bladder draws excess fluids to that place due to weakness in its positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say of these that one should cover the area with moist linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to achieve equal pressure all around; then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicines.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from a bone protruding through the skin, and doubt occurs to them, then it is necessary to cut near where the broken rib is located, and it is appropriate to place an instrument there for protection.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then one must cut the bone, and gently pull it slightly, and then sew the edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with emplasters until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And if an abscess comes forth, then place a cloth soaked in rose oil on it and over the wound;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And care while the location is such that it requires an incision, and let them lie on their side with support under the spine where they should be stable.
de la brisure dou col	From the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Never comes a fracture of the hip bone, and rarely does it bow.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 and similarly to the spinal column of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, watch carefully if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when pricked with a needle, do not feel them.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that they are dead in various positions, and if you move them and they feel well when restrained but not moved, know that the bone's joint is preserved, and the patient will be healed if treated accordingly.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And if similar things occur in the spinal column of the back, and you see to know whether it is stable or not, take care if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents that have taken place, and on the back swells with windiness and egestion without will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when it has swollen above its belly, if there is egression without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it has been soved on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Know that they are deadly.
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 If one does not labor at their healing.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the care is that if there is an abscess hot, apply oil of rose or oil from goose yolk until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then place on one of the comforting and drying plasters and bandage with a tie, and command the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bone dislocates, then cover the area with a bandage;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then extract the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if large, with a stitch, then treat with fragrant balm ointment until it is well.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 If the head of the joint is broken, called "the knee's head", put your poultice from your left hand and place it even with your right hand at will, then apply the plaster and stake on top if needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Then bind it, and if there is bone exposed, treat above, below, and the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of broken bone of the hip joint
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 Sometimes the hip bone breaks, and if this happens, there should be no slight reduction at all.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 Treat long and down to the pubic bone, causing pain in place, swelling, and bruising where broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And the restoration is that you extend your hand above until it is over the breakage.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 And you say what the fracture and appearance of it is;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 If the fracture is only at the head, make the fracture even, until it returns to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	;ta are and and: If you c.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have made it even, place it on a board, then put a stake of wood or metal underneath, and hold the fracture so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 And apply pressure from below the ribs until they are level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 If pus comes out, do not touch it, until the discharge is calmed down, and put what we have mentioned before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then return to restoration, and hold it as needed, if there has been no further accident.
et c’est li maniere.	 And this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The adductors are those between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if they are injured, then it should be restored according to one of two methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 which is that you take a piece of medium-sized bone in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And cut two holes for the strings, and tie them at the top, then place the patient underneath.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 then pour the patient's arm that is broken on the bone piece until it heals, and provide them with a wooden brace at one-half its length, then fasten it below any heavy object or extenders as needed.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 then you must bind the fracture together with both hands at once, until the fracture heals properly.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	; that theird; set sal the by; or d thembobint ou tue en lesse sulittelle est this is they.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is further out, restrain the sinew below the break, and above the break, and stretch each muscle to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, one must place a splint behind the socket and another on the other side, below the fracture.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 And similarly if the fracture is on the other side, one must place a light splint without strain until the fracture is level with the socket and the bone.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then align the fracture as needed, and stabilize it unless an abscess occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if an abscess occurs, do not bind it until seven days have passed and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil of roses to ease the abscess.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then bind it and the way to do so is to place a plaster over the fracture, then join the arm above the shoulder, placing your hand on the shoulder or breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And put the sling on it, and hold above the shoulder, and along the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you suspect that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than others, and have between each splint an inch of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture by three inches from each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then hold onto the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter on fractures, stronger and closer together.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the dislocation of the splints and the strain as we have said, during the hour when you return the fractured limb, and doubt that the wound is hot, let it be bound until the seventh day as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then for three days observe the bandage, ensuring no itching or swelling occurs at the site, so that numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if none of these incidents occur, do not dislocate it for more than three days or longer, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands above their abdomen.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 and place a linen bandage evenly on the shoulder socket, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the broken limb does not move or become softened by the ties.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 if it improves due to the power of medicine, and give the patient the flesh that we have previously prepared, in a way that the meat is most subtle.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And when it begins to resume, give it firm support.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in forty days altogether;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And then one must dislocate them again and administer baths and poultices with oil to realign the limb correctly.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is ugly and swollen, it remains dislocated for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	For a broken arm fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is made of two bones called "phalanges," one being small and the other supporting the palm.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 and the other is large, and that which extends forward from the smaller joint.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 Sometimes only the large phalange is broken, or the small one; sometimes both are fractured together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small phalanges are broken, the restoration and healing are easy;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when the large [bone] is broken, so it is bad healing, with more pain than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it's only small vessels that are broken, then the treatment requires slight extension and balancing.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if it's a fractured bone, then extraction must be done stronger;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And extend the hand near it, and tie up the sleeve higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other digits, and crosses of pain directly on him, and the bone in front of him raised higher, that the patient suffers no more trouble.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then extend the minor ministers both arms to the area under his hand or at the wrist, and other ministers another above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place the mirror evenly, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each one back to its position, and if any are dislocated that grip the bone, and you cannot restore it to its position, then strike above and cut the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And if with the fracture comes an open wound, I have spoken to each chapter separately;
si pren la cure.	 If you take this treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And at the beginning of the restoration if an abscess arises, make a plaster from rose oil and white wax-based balm so that it is neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 and apply the plaster gently over the area until the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 And then remove the plaster, and put on a poultice with plenty of egg white, apply it where there are breaks, and make that patch wider and thicker than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 and mark where there should be six or more additional splints in various arrangements:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 And is strained more towards the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less in approaching it, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And make the stitches to which it is fastened of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And repair the limb and ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if any accident comes to the limb, as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itchiness is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 and let the limb not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones set right, along with similar things, so it is.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a bit and let it rest for some time until the swelling subsides, then resume binding.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not loosen until X days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 or in between, then secure its hands to its neck, and let their collars be equal, and guard against movement and shifting, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And say that this fracture is healed in XYZ days or in XLV days, and sometimes in XX days, according to the composition and nature of the substances.
de la brisure de la main	Of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	He says that on the back of the hand and in our fingers, there are few fractures, but they bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, it must be that the patient sews crosswise, and lies flat in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 then places his hand under the extended table, and extends the physicians' fingers over the broken bones, and aligns them evenly until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 and applies the plaster and poultices, if there is an abscess, then he puts in a splint according to the amount of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 and it should be wrapped in a piece of linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if the break is near the eyebrow within the belly of the sole, make a bandage from linen cloths and instruct the patient to fasten it at their injured arch.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 Then the strain of a long bandage is applied and it should be adjusted just as large as the palm's sole, and the strain is maintained appropriately.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the hind part, it's necessary to place a splint underneath and another above on the plantar side, so that the hand remains exposed and straight; then bind it entirely around the hand, ensuring the ligaments between the two are sealed.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if the break comes to either of your ankles, if they are swollen, adjust them equally as necessary.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 and the strain with a sole is applied, and if you see that it requires a small straight splint to lift the fracture, do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 and if the break is like other ankles, in the index or one of the others, adjust them equally, and tie with the healthy toe that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 When you bind them all together firmly, so they do not move, or place on a pillow as if sewn.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And take care in the treatment and positioning of an abscess head, and remove what comes out as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken hip joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And its treatment involves binding the limbs above the breakage, and otherwise below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 The patient lies face downward, then each minister extends their link equally to their respective parts;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And this is when the breakage occurs within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be towards the wrist and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 And similarly if it's near the knee, then the links should be close to the knee and extensions below.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then place the mirror on the bone, as evenly as in its natural shape with both hands, and then apply the bandage, and let it rest, if no abscess appears there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if an abscess is present, allow it to calm down first then return to your work and care;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The ligature is made in the following manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is necessary that you wrap it with two or three layers of doubled bandages and make allowance for excess material. Then bend the leg until the heel reaches the base of the calf, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the groin, and let the end of the string pass over.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 Then turn to the leg and thigh with a bandage, then apply it to the fracture site, and place a splint on the leg bone.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 Then wrap the length between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to evenly apply pressure, then begin binding firmly using three or four twists above the fracture.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 and as you move closer to the fracture site, less tighten it;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 then extend the two ends of the thread between the leg and thigh, and tie three more above that, then return to untie at the head end until you reach near the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 If it doesn't move from its place while tightened, leave it as is; then if there are no signs of abscess or swelling appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 If it occurs, if a dislocation happens, and quickly address what is happening, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 And if there are bone fragments involved, then cutting may be necessary, which one can do.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 And if it cannot be done, then splitting the limb is required, and pulling out the iron.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And heal as we have said until it becomes sound again.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 And never is the thigh broken so that one places stakes inside, as in the shoulder and arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 Yet, with such restoration performed, it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, or a little more or less, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the hollow of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 It is said that in the glen of the neck there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if broken, it is not so much a crack or piercing, but occurs in all wounds, and causes pain, and feels very unwell.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And the repair is that one aligns what was lost with its counterparts as much as possible, so they can move.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then apply the plaster cast, and insert a round splint if necessary, and stabilize it as needed, then address all other breaks and injuries such as abscesses that are hot and similar issues.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply what is appropriate for each injury, ensuring they are well-tended.
de la brisure de la jambe	Concerning the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one called the tibia and the other called the fibula.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 and it experiences all types of fractures as they occur in the arm, so is the restoration just like that for the arm equally, and the procedures are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is shattered, then turn to face forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and the wound is visible.
et torne desoz.	 And then turn away from there.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then make an extension, adjust it evenly, and attach the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 However, if the breakage is severe, and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be smaller and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 and balance it according to your wisdom.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take two staves of hardwood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, being double the length of the leg from knee to ankle.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 then wrap it twice with bands above and below, securely tie them together, and at this band the leg will not lean to the right or left, which is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And none administer the bear's gall of the long leg bone, and if it is broken, and they set the leg to prevent movement, properly performing the splint in the break where there is injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If treated until it becomes healthy again.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Regarding the fracture of the bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot a break occurs sometimes and in the shinbone, and nothing happens to cause weakness or other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if it occurs as a broken foot bone fracture and you see the bones protruding from each other, place such maladies underfoot on the ground, as if they would walk, then now put your own foot beneath theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 First place the plug and stop up above it, then put under the belly with two fingers a small tablet of hemp paste, then strain towards the abdomen immediately, then wrap all around with bandages and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, for you will find that the bones are equal again, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if there are any broken bones, repair them, as we have said about the hand's bones.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then insert a splint for the broken bone according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place underneath the abdomen that tablet I mentioned, and strain immediately.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 And if there are two or three, or more broken bones, repair them and place a splint for each according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strain the tablet underneath the abdomen.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And so it is when on top of the table near the head of the bed, that you should properly position him well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And one must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, just as we have mentioned.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 and treat each accident as it is due.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the fracture of the hand bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the bone of womanhood is broken, she should be placed in an enlarged seat, then tilt to the part of her back and held behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 then fill the bag with cotton from the patient's nature, and put as much in as it can hold.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 then stand the woman up and lift her back little by little, and then push in the cotton until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and aligns the bone with its natural position.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when it is about to urinate, wrap with cotton, and after having urinated, if it resets itself, thus make seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 If it is healed, and if you see this, take a sheeps' bladder, tie cloth to the opening, and pour all the contents into nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then blow through the cloth until the inside of the bladder is empty.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 Nature will restore the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then be filled with cotton and leave so for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the bone of the arm or woman's body is broken, restore it as we have said in the thigh bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and effort to it; listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For the fracture indicates various pathways for restoration in several cases.
enten le donques.	 Then let us proceed.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In the rod, when it is broken, it takes an oatmeal shape and inserts the rod.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap with a dressing around it, and leave for three days or as needed on it, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fracture with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those who have a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, as long as the sinews we mentioned confirm this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, and there remains lead poisoning, unless you have other things, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, as long as abscesses do not appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	; they can. the same:
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the joint, it must be gently set into place with your hands, in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the extension does not fit to make your hands equal, use this instrument of iron which is 7 or 8 inches long, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 and therefore you will need your barber to grasp it 3 or 4 times, depending on what is needed for each breakage treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 and make it round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and leave some room at the front end.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palanquin," so that the shoulder head must be placed under the visible part of the bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And he must set it once so that it returns to its place, ensuring they are equal on either side.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot properly take hold of the bone, then it must be cut off until the splints have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, use the handle of an appropriate instrument for this purpose, either cutting or sawing, to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 then remove that which is embedded in the bone with a sharp and small scrapes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned to its place, if the patient feels great pain afterwards, believe that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 If you do so that it returns to its place, then wrap the wound in a fine black sticky pitch, and neatly if necessary.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 and do not put any salve or other substance on the wound that may contain oil, so as to prevent decay.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 then apply dressings as you have restored the beone, and leave the wound exposed, bandage the covering completely, according to the size of the wound, and ensure well that the wound is not strained with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have foolish physicians done this to patients, causing them harm or death on numerous occasions.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 So it is the application less harsh and more gentle than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is bad or large and you suspect no accident has occurred here as we have said, and there is pain at the location, then it does not require placing on a bed of eggshells.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 but wrap around it, in place of eggshells, with durable fabrics and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one or two days that pus flows from the wound, remove what you have placed on it, and apply healing salve to the wounds, as with a four-part remedy and similar substances.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes relaxed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be fitted with a splint so that the bow supports it lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if several days pass and it cannot be straightened but continues bent like this, for there are small bone fragments, you must clean the wound with gauze and remove all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if an abscess comes to the area, or another form of decay, it is necessary that you treat it, as described in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is fractured and protrudes from the limb, as in the hip or shoulder, with other similar large limbs, do not attempt to pull it out, for many times this leads to death, but leave it until it heals.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 By chance it may occur through him after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you know how.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 and if you do not know how, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises which arise upon the saddle.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant thing to see is how the limb is shaped.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 and perhaps cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Thus beware if it feels fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 if you administer medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, among others, then take any of these things individually or all together, and boil them with tonic wine, vinegar abundance, or vinegar essence.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And the metal is inserted into the nostrils, and it is tightened well, and should not be loosened for days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 Then dislocate it again, and repeat with another one until there are no more bone fragments.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 or you strain over a well-made piece of wood;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 for the property of the wood is such that it draws out all swelling on top of limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 and if the bone fragment is as hard as stone and needs to be removed, do so with a saw, and create the excess visible.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 or you reduce it by any means necessary until it is removed, and heal as long as it remains clean.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the broken bone is restored, and follows after weak and delicate limbs for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 Because one is too tightly bound, and was not loosened as it should be.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 Or because there were too many bindings, and could not come to relieve the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 Or due to excessive bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 Or because of overly large movements, not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 Or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the treatment should be that you feed the patient well and make the body tender until there is an increase in blood within him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 And administer baths, and give joy and comfort to him.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 Then apply poultices to the limb, such that it draws significant nourishment, and often raises its temperature with water compresses until proper nourishment reaches the limb.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And returns to its natural position.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After injury has healed, the limb becomes twisted
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken openly, and the shape of the limb is unattractive, yet it still maintains its natural function.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 If you do not trust the foolish who claim that the limb should be broken anew entirely, and many fools in our land have done so.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 And these treatments are blamed, leading to great harm, and possibly death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 However, if the lumps and tortures are recent, it is necessary to treat them with hot water, or boiled softening herbs such as witch hazel leaves, roots, melilotus seeds, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 Et you apply the soothing paste like diachylon well made, and take the mucilage of wormwood, and mix it with fat from geese or oil of sesame, and make a poultice on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 And you take the animal fats, and grind them with fine bran, and add certain medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And at no time is an inflamed bone treated by continuously rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And thus, adjust the position of each limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And if the tortuousness is old and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be pried open with iron, so that you must cover it completely with a slightly sharp scalpel.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 and apply compresses and pay attention during treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, if necessary now reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if delayed, the eyes may become inflamed, and possibly it can be returned to place with difficulty.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 For this is why it must not be moved when it has swelled.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 Many times, it brings about phlegm and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 Also, when this occurs, have the patient drink wine, then let them rest until the swelling is calmed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then apply warm water and oil to the limb, then gently massage each part as treatment comes into place in its proper location.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	.
des mandibules	Of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 Occasionally, the jawbones may be dislocated, and dislocations of both occur in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they are slightly out of place from their original positions, and soften a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 or they are entirely dislocated and tilt towards the painful side, causing drooling from the mouth that they cannot contain, nor can they close their mouth, which also wraps around their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When dislocation is slight, it can return on its own in various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 If it is complete and well-formed, then one must quickly reset it without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 And in such a manner that the minister washes your head and inserts a small spoon into one of his hands at the root of the lower jaw's dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And let the other hand be ready to balance it out.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 Instruct the patient to relax his jawbones and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And then put it inside of its place until they are balanced equally; and take your right beforehands:
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jawbones are together, use warm water and oil to gently move them.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not attempt the reset otherwise as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are returned equally, and the patient's mouth closes well indicating softening sensation, then place on cloths soaked in a padded cover made of rose oil and wax, and lightly bind with loose ties.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 and the patient sleeps on his back with his head between two pillows, ensuring he does not move to either side or strain to shift, but gently eats soft meat until the pains have subsided, and the jawbones are numbed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 and then provide him what he wants to eat easily, and do not work at opening the mouth for eating or drinking until his jawbones are well numbed and soothed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not returned to their original positions, fever and usual complaints may come, and perhaps abdominal issues, or possibly complete vomiting of bile alone.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this, then you know it is dislocation.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times death occurs to those who experience it, within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the hernia
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The hernia cannot dislodge from within the ribcage and below, and it is never displaced once formed, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back with legs apart, and extends their arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 and then press firmly at its place with your hand, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 then apply the plaster and bandage, and strain (or tighten).
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 and the shoulder that is towards the armpit cannot dislocate.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 if not possible, and if it does dislocate at any time, then reset to its place as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then apply the plaster and bandage, and strain (or tighten), and advise the patient to rest until they are well again.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it has moved out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 by which one is that it dislocates to the bottom part of the upper arm;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 and the second is towards the lower part;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 and sometimes upwards, but this occurs rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 and it does not dislocate backwards from the shoulder, nor inward into the muscles.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 and sometimes downwards towards the upper arm, especially in those who have little flesh, as it happens quickly to them.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 but for those with ample flesh, it comes out scarcely, and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there are individuals with blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess; they think it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Indeed, you must test it, until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 And dislocation is known when it moves towards the shoulder blade, and there is a noticeable difference between the affected and healthy shoulders, and you will find their various manifestations.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 and at the top of the shoulder, you will find a hollow, as if it were an eye socket.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 and the patient cannot return their hand to its normal position or move at all.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly observe it at the socket.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 and this type of dislocation cannot be corrected unless it occurs anew or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 And the method is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upward, then place his hands under the shoulder, and firmly lift the dislocation back into position.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below.
si venra hastanment.	 if done quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not come as we have said on the following days, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 and it should be treated with soothing and calming substances such as an infusion of valerian and fenugreek and honey in water, then treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 then place a strip of linen equally not too soft nor too hard on the patient's back under the shoulder blade, then align their heel with the strip, and gently lift the head of the dislocated shoulder.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And other remedies apply to the patient's head, so it does not move downward.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 and when that shoulder returns now, you see if you reset according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 and ensure that a physician who is taller than the patient is present.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 and stand on the side of their chest, push up the shoulder from under the seat of the patient, lift the seat to the top, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 and other remedaders guide the hand of the patient downward toward their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 If the patient is too lightweight, accompany them with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And the reset can also be done in another way.
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 and it is that you plant a long pole into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is aligned as with a spit, neither too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 Then it is to be put back under the patient, but that he has soft cloths over, and the patient lies long on his side.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 Then extend his hand towards the other side gently, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if it does not wish to return for all these reasons that we have mentioned, then do this remedy:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take a shing of two arms in length and four fingers wide, which has the head turned so that it can enter evenly from under the seat, as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then place soft cloths on top of his side so that it does not slip the patient, then put under the seat where the patient lies.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 Extend his arm over the length of his side, and place the shoulder on top, with the hand at the head of the arm, then put the arm under an arbor of a wide stool, extend the hands downward, and let the body hang towards the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The joint has been dislocated for some time now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is set in place, however you do so, it must be that you put under the saddle a staff of woolen yarn, then apply a poultice of powdered medicine, with incense and ointment of frankincense on all around the shoulder, then tighten it away from the saddle quickly, and wrap the hand at its neck, leaving hands hanging thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it is necessary that he rests little by little, until the limb is comfortable, because it will recover sooner.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then rest more after 3 or 7 days and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 and if it is firm and not weakened, then healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is forced out due to moisture that caused it or another reason, you must apply three punctures with cautery as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this and it dislocates again after e7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift any arm upwards, then understand that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is pinched or stretched or weakened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that is towards the worse and the muscles or back, it occurs due to impact and extension of hands, and by another method.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And care until it becomes healthy again.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing come tremors in the limb and later movements, the patient uses them many times until those tremors cease, returning to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the knee
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Seams that the shoulder joint is dislocated to points, and returns to its point of dislocation.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And it is dislocated from all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, as one can see clearly and feel distinctly.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 And it is dislocated according to each type of displacement.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when joining the patient's joint properly with the healthy one, you should see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And you must reset it immediately as abscesses appear, for if they arise, the repositioning would be more difficult.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 and perhaps cannot be realigned at all in some cases, especially when it is behind.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 if worse than other types of dislocation, causes more pain, and possibly leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And restoration is possible when it can be realigned, you extend your hands on both sides of the limb.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and spread the arms wide, placing the hands around it as indicated by its circumference, above and below, and pushing the joint back together or at the base of the palm until it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	When dislocation is before, it returns when the hand doubles to itself and the root of the palm's edge that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not return to its place, perform strong straightening.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 And there are two ministers who extend the arm and support it with their hands, so that it does not move during extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 Then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a long and wide piece of cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 And when the wind reaches the joint at its connection to the hand, anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly until it heals.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when it is in place, put on dry paste with egg yolk, then bind it firmly, and support the arm at the sore patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firmly in place, then dislocate it again and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then repeat the manipulation and reposition it, leaving it so for a few days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 Then dislocate again.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if it feels weak after the resetting of the joint and moves again, then bathe and rub well, pressing until it is eased.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 or you place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then reset it, and have the patient take a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 and when it is sweaty, rub the joint gently, then replace the sheep's wool on top, and then have the patient bathe.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And thus do so twice or three times until it is put back in place.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 and if you see, then apply a warm wheat paste mixed with butter, and strain over it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 so it shall return to its proper place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The hand's dislocation occurs, and its return is easier than other dislocations.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 Nevertheless, it must be quickly returned to its place at the same hour as it is dislocated, so that it may swell or an abscess may form hotly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the resettling is that you place the injured hand under a table, extend its fingers, and align the wrists equally so that it places its palm over the dislocation's appearance, and hold until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 It is also necessary to check if it is properly positioned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then instruct the patient to place their back on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 If the dislocation is on the back of the hand, make the patient place their hand's back against a table, and let the doctor position their hand under the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, apply the soothing touch of asterisked straps and let them rest until they start to ease again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if it cannot be tolerated, and you cannot place it back in position for several days, as the twisted joint persists.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 and neither providing food nor water to the patient until their hands are sufficiently healed, and they can grip nothing at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 then tell that the nerves or the artery have been cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If there is no other remedy than to apply fire near the wound, and sometimes it serves no other purpose.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at rest, place them on the platform as we have said, then grasp and leave for 5 days, then release and let it be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they cannot move well, and there is no trembling, then apply warm water with millet, and rub until it feels fine.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of dislocation of the hand's fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 Dislocations never occur in both directions of the hand, neither to the back of the palm nor to the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 Then they are stuck in place, and the dislocation is returned to its pockets until it heals, then support the head of the hand and turn it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 And leave it for two days, then set it straight again after that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 and from there bind it as we have said, leaving the joint for a day, then making it move again, and rejoining the nut.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this often until it is narrowed, and do the same if dislocated to the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And likewise do, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	For the dislocation of the spinal column in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spinal column or the neck is dislocated, if there are multiple occurrences and no remedy, it quickly kills the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the signs are such that the discharges jump up forcefully without willingness and cannot be held back, causing many times any limb to become weakened or affecting either both knees or one of the two arms or a single one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And often it moves the spine into four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 That which moves to the rear is called "gilbo-itis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The treatment is that you should beware if "gilbo-itis" arises from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 If there is no remedy or healing for the entirety of it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things are the ancient methods of treatment with great words, where there is no benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the swelling that comes upon the breast, there is neither remedy nor health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 and also those that arise directly in the ribs, and cannot be treated except for those precisely which come to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 and it is that the sick person be stretched over their face one place evenly, and have strain from them, so they do not writhe;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 then apply a hot iron to the head in clay formed, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the neck of the sick person, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the top and the other at the joints, among the two sharpened instruments.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 And they should be well secured, and position the instrument as we have said, with his palms on the spine forming a straight line until it is properly aligned.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not return with this procedure, take a stick three arms long and sharpened from the front, and place the patient to one side, then set the head of the stick at the front above their pelvis, and then insert the middle part of the stick into the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And position the minister's hands on the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see it, make it with a turnkey that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And you should insert two wires through the head of the arm with great swelling, and toward other parts, and between each wire, there should be enough space.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And in each wire, the turnkey must fit correctly, and the wires should be firmly secured in place, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between each wire there should be an additional turning wire where the links can turn, and in these turns two small wires of enough length to rotate the turnkey.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then secure the link among the elements on the turnkey toward the head, and the other link towards the extremities at the other turnkey, and each servant rotates their turnkey along the entire chain, and the master aligns the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 When they are aligned, place the drying plaster with plenty of wax, then the cotton, and then the splint from a tablet three fingers long to properly position the glenoid cavity and the healthy part of the spondyle, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and let the patient rest quietly until healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 If no issue arises by the end of healing, administer softening and soothing medications with the splint we have mentioned previously.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And never administer a piece of iron, and ensure that there is no appearance in the back part of the spinal column, and take care to avoid dislocations.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 And it is the bone that has opened up, which is why there must be no assumption.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 There might come death by chance.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocation of the hip joint
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Understand that the joints of the hip and shoulder only come from dislocation alone, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 into itself and outward, and front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 and more internally than externally, and rarely dislocates front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the recognition of an internal dislocation is such that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens up more joints for the injured than the healthy, and the injured cannot double its knee at fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the leg which is near an inflamed abscess due to the fact that the hip joint approaches there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those for whom it occurs is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And for those who suffer from it in front, they should keep their leg extended properly according to recovery.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 In any case, do not double the pain in the neck, and if you wish to make it move beforehand, it cannot be done, and retains its urine, and swells with anger, and as it moves forward, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for those who suffer behind it are such that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, anger is alleviated, and the head of the hip to its place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The return of this type of dislocation is that you should reset it where the dislocation occurred first, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 and it must not be assumed to have healed.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in cases where the dislocation is recent, and it's one of the four types of dislocations, you should quickly return the joint, push down on it and pull upwards, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 By chance if it returns, no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must select a strong minister and bind the leg firmly with two hands or one band around the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 and another minister extends his hands over it in such a way that he places them below the kneecaps, then tightens a thin band around the thigh.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and another cuts the head off the sling.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 and all extend upwards and downwards at once so that the patient is lifted from the ground once and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for 4 types, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, you must apply treatment to its kindred.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When dislocation is in the jawbone, you must support the patient on their sound side and then place a band around the base of the thigh, and the part that is below the groin, then extend the band upwards towards the groin and towards the hip.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then gather other ministers of men by their arms, and embrace the large joint of the crooked thigh, extending it forward fully.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 If it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 And this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then one must bind the two feet of the crooked leg together with a strong flexible ligature above both heels and knees, and keep the affected leg extended further than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 Then hang it from the head of a staff, with two long arms outstretched on the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Then command one minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and have other ministers hang alongside with the crooked leg, fully embracing the thigh, as now the joint quickly returns.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is on its way out, you should place the patient as mentioned in those with gangrenous wounds, and properly separate the ligaments above the affected leg, and at the knee likewise.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then apply two cauterizing agents: one on the head and one elsewhere on the body, then insert a cauterizing rod between the buttocks near the affected area.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And have moistened bandages placed around it so that the patient does not move, then each minister moves towards him and he aligns his hand with the dislocation equally.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is well.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place on a board and press as we have said with sprains, and touch the patient near the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is in front, it must be that you extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And place his hand on the painful side of the affected area, then press with the other hand and extend towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 If the dislocation is in its place, do not extend the patient's arm or lift it off the ground. Instead, let it lie as if the elbow were dislocated when it was set wrongly during sleep on both elbows, as we have said above.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And let the ligament be stretched as we have described beforehand, and one must apply pressure to the joint against the board.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And it will reach a point when the patient extends his legs, which will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Then approach the buttocks and place the splint, and secure with a bandage so that the elbow does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 And let it rest for three or four days, then release it, and place the splint again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 And if you see that they are equal, then strain as before, and let it be for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then release it gently, and allow the limb to heal completely, until the member is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The joint dislocates in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 that is to say, inward and outward, and backward.
et ne desalue point devant.	 and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not return to the hip, understand that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back to his face, and put your foot under his.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 Then take its thighs with your palms, and pull them apart between your thumbs, then bend the two shanks of the thigh firmly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 and other ministers extend their foot, until the kneecap returns to its place, with signs that it bends well on its thigh slightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 and apply the plaster over it, straighten the leg at the hip, with bandages firm for three or four days, then release.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 and do not make the patient walk too soon until their limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not much affected, it must be firmly supported strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the elbow, until it becomes well-aligned.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes numb, never fully dislocated, within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 And signs are such that the ankle is swollen, and try before reaching the part from where it dislocates.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The repositioning should be gentle, and he must stretch it lightly into his hands when barely touched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 When it is dislocated completely, one must make the patient sit upright directly and gently move the limb using a staff outside through the leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then raise the foot towards your right hand, and then towards the left two times, then extend it upwards, and place the foot firmly above.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this twice as we have said, bending and extending the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it returns, that is good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 If not, repeat the procedure since it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 If it cannot return this way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground and firmly press a staff between their thighs, with linens around them so they do not shake.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 Then dye the minister's thigh, and another minister extends his foot with ropes or strips of cloth so that he ties them around the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 Then each minister is extended equally, and the ties are pulled tight between their thighs to hold the patient steady as they stretch them.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then place the mirror symmetrically for the dislocation at his hands, and another minister dyes the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return rapidly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it reaches the point of no return, apply the poultice and plug thereon, strain firmly, tie the foot to the leg, and watch for the veins behind the ankle that the ties are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 Then let it rest for two or three days, and if he improves, bind it loosely.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Then remove the bandage on the fourth day or sooner, and forbid the patient from moving for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if he improves before this time, it is not assured that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes there, one must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	From the shoulder dislocation and its treatment, let's discuss a few related matters:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	by;t what d. If:
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if the dislocation is in any of his shoulder or foot bones, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on a level surface or a table straight up, and place your foot under the joints affected, then press firmly with your foot until they return.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when they are even, and nothing appears amiss, place two fingers of your foot under the sole and strain firmly, then let it rest for three days before removing.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And make it rest until it is set right.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	For both wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one sees that it needs to be restored, often happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 If you are not overly confident in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow to judge;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 And begin with soothing treatments for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscess may heal there.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is in place, then apply soothing treatments for hot abscesses and care for the wound as needed with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones will be displaced, and treat them as we have described in simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And be wary of succumbing to fear, as I have advised, for it is fitting according to your Maker and the wisdom of armament and body.
