O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its explanation and concluded by its expositions and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this chapter, which is part of the work on hands, namely 'Surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and carried out everywhere, it has been neglected except for a few details from ancient books that describe what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus arises error and folly, and understanding is closed off, and wisdom has departed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 Or it seems to me that I want to bring this treatise to life, along with the order of its content according to exposure and clarification, and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I shall bring together the forms of instruments for cautery, and other tools of surgery with preparation and explanation as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters at hand in our times, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	It is necessary for those who undertake this to ascend in the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, understanding the judgment of bones, their shapes and connections and separations, having knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and number of veins, and their movement and active and resting states.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And thus Hippocrates states that nothing without the art is much, and little without it.
et meismement en l’art de main.	 And especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you in the introduction to this book that those who are not mindful of the aforementioned things should be careful lest they err and kill people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 Thus, I have often thought of those who involve themselves in this knowledge but abandon the theory and lose their experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 For I saw a mad physician who cut an abscess of scrofulous glands or throat in a woman and severed the arteries near the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 for this is why so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another physician treating a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 if he took with him a part of the bladder, and he died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called upon to treat it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he was to be cut open, he would surely die from it.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another physician who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was an open wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the ignorant physician pushed the break onto the wound without proper alignment, and did not let it heal properly, leaving it that way for so long.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And he commands that it shall not be dislocated again;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 and remain thus so the leg becomes completely paralyzed, and the fingers too, leading to loss.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I come here called upon him, and hurried to dislocate his leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 and when I did dislocate it, he became at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But in any case the contamination was already confirmed or limb, and could not be cured;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And the contamination ceased to spread through the member until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And behold I see another physician who fells an encrusted abscess, which then inflames due to the spite of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humors, does not need to be touched with iron unless in part its location allows for the removal of what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 namely, where there is danger in various conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show, at each place of this book, where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 For that's why you must guard yourselves well, so the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 If you take your arms in consideration and begin treating the illnesses easily yet firmly, using the best method for by God's grace to achieve health and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 and let the hopeful diseases bring about great health. (Note: This line may not make perfect sense in English as it was probably a general proverb or sentiment meant to encourage
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 and take up your arms where you find doubt, and have faith within yourself that you may come from this world to the other of glory. (This line is also not perfectly translatable but gives an encouraging sentiment about having faith in oneself.)
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galien speaks in some of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not treat illnesses poorly, lest you be called mad doctors.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapters are about fire and medical cauldrons of water, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 And of forms of tumors, and iron instruments for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapter concerns cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and arrow extraction, and such matters.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 And it is the ordered chapter on tumor forms.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and such matters.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And it is ordered from the head to the feet, and on tumor forms.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So we shall remember our work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of help and the harm of each composition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the quality of the aid, and its harm, is the longest word and subtle science and hidden remedy.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 and what many wise men speak, they agree on this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 And I am troubled by their few words, for I will regain strength.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cauterization helps with all constitutions or matters where it is applied, both of the humors.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 That is to say, hot temperament refers to matter, and dry temperament also refers to matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In the combined hot and dry temperaments with regard to matter, they converse and say that cauterization is of great help.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 and the other says the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 that cauterization does not help with diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with hot medicine due to heat, nor dryness alone.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 And those who say the opposite assert that cauterebe greatly helps diseases of heat and dryness arising in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the person and their moisture with the fiery temperament, you find the body to be cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And in any case, it should only be attempted by those who have experience and know well the art of cauterization, the diversity of human constitutions, their dispositions and causes of diseases, as well as incidents and duration over time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 We have no fear for other constitutions, especially those with cold and damp illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the healers gathered and agreed on the treatment.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the cure, and even greater beneficence than burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	thed; Tap. ould that lesquilibtud: O.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 Burning medicines move from one member to another by combining them, bringing severe healing diseases to the affected limb;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 and sometimes it kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The fire for its high temperature and the kindness of its nature does not do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And I have found this through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, regarding the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 And so I excuse the length of my words, for it is not my desire to reveal to you the secrets contained within these pages and their explanations, as the philosopher demonstrates how they address diseases of the body.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Or receive them into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, when to perform the cauteries and praying lines.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that caustery is suitable at all times, for the harm which occurs is removed by means of caustery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 and especially because caustery is necessary for sudden pains that cannot wait until the onset of greater illness in the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And never think as do fools, just as they are known to act.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 because the disease which is healed by caustery does not have a return.
et il le dient ensi;	 And he says thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 But it is not as they think, because cautery is a remedy that changes the complexion and dries the humors causing pain, and it works more quickly than other medicines due to its potency and efficacy of its action and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And some cause is that the disease comes at any time according to the disposition of the sick and their location and its nature.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 And they are combined in him the excesses from acquiring meats and similar things, unless caustics are administered at the place where there is little excess and moisture, as with caustics for pain, and other such matters, so that the pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	 However, this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not know why cauldrons are called the last of medicine, and that is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 However, they do not believe that cauldrons are worth after medicines, but their understanding is false; cauldrons are the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any illness and they prove to be of no value, then we apply our cauldrons, which work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then indeed cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that a cauldron made of gold is more potent than one made of iron, and they claimed so not because it was a fork but due to the quality of the gold and its high value.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 and they said that the patient does not suffer deterioration from cauldrons, but this is indeed true as I have tested it myself, and found in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 And gold cauteries are worth more than iron ones, as they have said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 Also when you heat a gold instrument, do not judge its temperature by the color of gold alone, as it cools quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if you overheat it;
si font au feu;	 If done with fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 and thus there is enough obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the iron cautery as we have found suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil for anointing and healing purposes.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are for moisture and cold on the brain; there are two that are done because of an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors descending from the head into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, as well as all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, stroke, and similar afflictions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solutive medicine which modifies either III or IV chiefs, according to what the virtues and nature and customary tolerances of the patient can endure.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 and then address the head of the illness again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 And then make it sit cross-legged between your hands and place its hands on some flat surface.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 After that, put the base of your palm over the base of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 and where your two ways will come, bleed it first and then warm the caustic which is called "olive oil," for its form is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And he places it back into its place with incision, and does so by drawing and straining your hand little by little while turning.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then lightly lift your hand, and carefully return the bone as you see the small joint.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 And if you do not see it, then resume the cautery until you see the bone as I have instructed.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 After taking a little salt, and placing moist and soft cotton inside, then places it back on the joint, leaving it there for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 Then applies butter to the cotton.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 And leaves it until the scalding is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrapharmacist," until it is sound.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And the elders say, when a wound is left open longer, it drains more.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and so, if you help move it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these say that one must thoroughly cauterize the part where bone is burnt and then repair what has been burnt off from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that the fire-cautery must be held longer, and pushed in so hard to widen the hole as wide as a woman's ring inserted into her fingers, so that the fluids can exit.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and it should be left open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 after this, cleanse and heal.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of fire-cautery do not seem to me good in all cases, but only for some men who have reason to fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and it seems to me that I should leave it out.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 For the head is weakened by continuous natural discharges as we testify with other limbs.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 Similarly, when the head is weak in the patient naturally, and the first sign of healing is more beneficial and effective for them, then from this treatment I work accordingly with great benefit.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ankle pain to severe headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When there is chronic pain throughout the head and it lasts for a long time, one must use herbs and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 and if one performs the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not improve.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Be aware if the patient's headache is of a strong nature, and it should not be too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then you must cauterize below that wound as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After performing the cautery on each wound of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cautery where it is called "vessel".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 and are the areas in which you apply cups.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 and lift your hand so that it does not touch the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak elsewhere.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 it is appropriate that the cauteries of the horns be more delicate than those used to cauterize half the head, and this is the method.
dou cautere dou chief	Of fire cautery for the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease extends to the whole area, and the head is purged by various medicines, and all other remedies I have mentioned under the heading of diseases are done, yet none help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then you make cauteries according to two methods, namely medicinal quinsy and wound treatment.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cautery for quinsy is that you pluck a hair of wool, and remove the scurf and cover it with two hairs, then make an incision at the temple where the pain persists so that you can replace the woolen thread without the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 and when it is replaced, let it be tied off securely and left for twelve hours thus.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 and then untie and treat the woolen thread, and leave the wound so for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 then put a piece of cotton soaked in butter until it becomes healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment with ointment until healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you see any of the burning remedies I have written or described in treating with burning medicines;
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery follows this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the form of that cauterizer:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like an owl or has little tufts of hair, and in appearance, it has a small similarity.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 and the mass is located on the scalp, hold your hand and gently twist the hair a bit until you see the division of skin that begins to scar.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 and lift your hand so the vessel does not burn further back, and it flows abundantly with blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 After placing cotton over the wound for three days on the scalp;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then you place clean cotton greased with butter, and then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you decide to perform a caustic treatment for this migraine using the cautery called "culutellar," at its tip, and be careful not to burn the artery in such a migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When you treat migraines as we have previously discussed in the division of diseases, and nothing seems to help, and you see that the previous cautery is not effective with either medicine or iron, then it becomes necessary for you to heat the "culutellar" cautery until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 and gently touch the tender area with a line half an inch long, then remove your hand once, and ensure that you do not burn the artery nor reach up to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And guard the jaw so it moves when bitten, and the nerves only have regard to movement and spasms do not come upon the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when cut or severed, where there is great fear and especially for those who are unaware of it, and untrained.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 And leave the wound open to air;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 However, I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you there where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that these cauldrons do not help at all with the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize within it as we have said in the head, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 and if you see, administer the caustic we have said or from the chapter on artery extraction, with the caustic that has two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 and this caustic is better than those and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of ear pain due to cold air
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from cold air and one has tried solvent medicines and other treatments we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then apply this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After pointing around the ear of the patient, where both sides hold pain, and move slightly above the root of the ear after you have reached there;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 et have X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing, leave it alone until it is healthy again.
de la torture de la bouche	For oral torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 The torture that must be treated with fire healing is not other than those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 and do not perform a fire treatment on the resemblances that come from crushing and blackening of veins.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When you treat this resemblance of torture that moves due to moisture from dragons and purging of the head and gargling, if it is ineffective, then one must perform three fire treatments on the patient.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 One at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temples, and the third on either side of the nose bridge.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 And place the cautery on the part that appears sound, and make the cautery at the top of the ear just a little below the tip of the outer edge, and another one in the temple as long as a finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 And leave the cautery so that half the head is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it's the appearance of the surgical knife we have described before, but it is a bit more subtle and it needs that the blade be slightly thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after curing them as I've explained before, until they are sound;
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 On the two horns of the head and in the skull itself, and at the place called "tympanic membranes," as we have previously stated, and the following fire cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And treat accordingly as we have said before.
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 This disease requires giving the patient large years and purgative pills to clear the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 After removing all of the patient's head hair, and placing the sinapis oil scalp bandage written in the treatise on dressings.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 And this is how to perform the cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If it turns out as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If it works as such, then it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if it does not, make three cauteries near the head, descending to the neck, and leave space between each one equal to two large measurements.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 And treat it as you would with the others, and if you see them adjacent, and the patient suffers greatly, make one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if necessary, place two on each side of the eyes, and treat until it heals.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 And let the cauterization be called "olivary," as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and fat as we have before said;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After shaving the patient's head, then make one cauterization in the middle and at each corner of the eyes, and two behind and three along the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers much, and the illness is severe, when four fire cauteries are made on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 and let it remain until a larger curl appears, then lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 after the healing when it is enough, and be the cautery called "olivary" that we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Surgical methods should not be used on the patient unless they are phlegmatic; first, one must purify the brain with leeches and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical affliction.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it is a child who cannot endure it, then give him gargling and chewing with medicinal substances frequently on the brain;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 then remove his hair from the head in measure, and make a cautery according to what we have said before, and also on the scrotum, and above each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if the patient is outside and suffering greatly, make fire cauteries as I have told to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and let it be an olive tree-shaped caustic according to how I have instructed.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, give them a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted dampness and large phlegm, then the fire cautery of parts as we have told should be applied to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is moistly sick, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be cleansed, according to its state in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After reaching the head of the malady;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 after making the proper incision, like a circle, if it's placed within the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and if the malady is crossed, ensure they are well held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 after applying the lining, use an ancient sheep's butter balm;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 and warm the covering quickly, so that they can endure some discomfort if necessary.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 After emptying the circle within the head, let it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And do this for the patient each week once with good treatment until they are healthy again.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see to cauterize it by making various points on the entire cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 and then place soft cotton in butter and poultry fat.
de l’awe des eulz	From the heat of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the heat comes first to the eyes as I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something that clarifies the mind, and protects from all dampness, and they may sweat or take baths multiple times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After instructing him to raise his head again, and you perform a caustery within the head, and you make two cauteries over both temples where the fissure of the skull is as two eyes together, or in one they are.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 and cover all the caustery veins and arteries that emerge from the skull, and they should be long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And take care of blood loss, and if you see too much blood flowing, then bind it with a dressing as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you about extracting arrows and the precautions to take when bandaging them as best you can.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 and never perform a fire or cold cauterization below the two bones behind it.
dou cors des larmes	In the body's tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, or near the veins that appear in front of them.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 and if it is due to cold excessive fluids, then you do the fire cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of descending them.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 I cauterize underneath the forehead, and two fire cauterizations on each temple, and two cold cauterizations below the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if there is further need, skillfully cauterize above the eyebrow with all small cauldrons.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Throughout the course of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you treat it as we have said in the section, and it does not help, then give the patient three draugebles of wormwood wine.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After the head injury, and he makes fire or millet cauldrons; olive oil cauldrons.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 And make two fire cauldrons of the 'clavis' type above both eyebrows, slightly off the hairline.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And guard the artery so that it is not burned.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavelis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then you cauterize with this cautery called "olivary.
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is why this occurs:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you see, then make two fire cauldrons on both eyebrows as long as they are like the eyebrows;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And do not leave it unattended except until the third part of the paper is charred, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	and t they le Clavt y Comis quele ; by: it'issued them.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Never does it happen that hairs of old age are converted to a dense mass and prick the eye, and you make cauterizations according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 It is known as being by fire or by burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 Or the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in good health;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 After placing a sign on the hair, make it similar to a dartboard, and let its beginning be near where the hairs are.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then I put fine cotton soaked in egg and musk oil on the wound, then apply the caustic of which this is the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After repeatedly applying cautery to the mark you have made a little at a time, let the color be even in that place.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 and the signs of health on the work are such that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the level of the wound.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 then lift your hand, leave it like this for three days, then put fine cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the ointment treatment until they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And when hairs come in again, and the flesh is softened then resume cauterization on the same spot as before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if hairs are absent, cauterize until the flesh is raised to its natural position and smooth, without any remaining pain from the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The medicinal fire cautery instructs the patient to let hair grow long and even, then make a paper form resembling a mugwort leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take French soap and fresh wax, half an ounce of each, and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 And do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then gently press on the form you have made like a leaf of myrtle, and place cotton wool over it.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And if the disease resides only in one side, work must be done therein, and similarly elsewhere as well.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 And place a wad of cotton from the oil into an eggshell.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And the patient's head should be in a sound state and your two fingers showing on the medicament; press lightly and move it frequently whenever the patient feels stinging from the medicament, for it stings as if of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, apply the medicinal bandage properly.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the stinging has passed, raise the wad again, and check if it looks lifted as if by heat or cutting.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 If so arranged, then well done.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If not, if the treatment is reapplied to its place or the medication has not worked yet, until your workings are equal and your eyes aligned.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place the cotton ball soaked in butter until the wound is healed, afterward cleanse the area of ointment called "dyafenis" and others, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And you must carefully watch your treatment with great care so that the medicine does not harm the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the paper becomes soft afterward and the hair pricks at the wound, restart the medication on that place properly, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment until it is healthy again.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And this is the form of the linden leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, let the constraints be.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And it should not be replaced on the straight path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of treating a fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then it is proper for you to perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Command the patient to place his head in your hand.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and instruct the assistant to hold the patient's head between their hands so that it does not move or turn.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 after apply soft cotton wool in an egg cup or lemon juice on the wound;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 then warm the caustic that is to be used.
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 and place it near the head as if like a quill in an arch, along with which the caustic should be placed.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you see it well-aligned from one end to the other, and if you see it as evenly as a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 However, this which is at your disposal must be moved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After pressing the abscess if it's open, and treating the infection, and drying it out.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 and if it's closed, then operate, and treat with bowstrings.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 after applying the hot caustic strongly, and hold your hand on the caustic at the painful part above the hair, so that your hands do not go mad.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 then put the caustic in the fat of the hair and make it rot.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you start the fire cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, start the caustic again once more, and if necessary, let it be for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 After placing cotton wool soaked in butter and treating the drywound with medicinal ointment until it is healed, after forty days pass, apply astringent medicinal water until the bone is uncovered.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And you should follow as described in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for anorectal abscesses, which none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 Attend to an abscess and open it up;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 After placing the subtle thread in the tear where the shape is:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and they make up to the quantity of one 20 pence weight;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 and hold the thread or needle firmly, so do not move the patient at all until the molten lead flows into its place.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 and it is appropriate to apply the oil with a piece of cotton wool or linen cloth soaked in egg white;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The place of the pus is like a tumor within the anus, and it heals by marvelous healthiness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, one must administer a blunt instrument to the anus, and return the fistula to its proper location in the body as required by its specific location.
des crevaices en levres	For ruptures of lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often occur cracks in lips which are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small lancet-like cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And the physician inserts [it] into those cavities as long as it comes near to fullness.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, he treats the lump of chafing until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become inflamed and hardened and is aged and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 and you treat it as we have said in stages, but it does not heal:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 then it is necessary for you to have the cauterization according to the quantity of the fastole.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After the opening or puncture of a fistula, hold your hand until the metal cools at its source and then place it.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do so once more after the treatment of what we have said about treatments, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 And if treated this way, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 And if not, then one must discover the location and remove the decayed bone, as you find in your treatise;
dou movement des dens	Of the slight movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but to no avail, then place the head of the patient in your lap.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After scraping the fire cautery so that its shape will come after, place a caul on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 And insert the heated caustery inside quickly, holding your hand so that the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After releasing your hand and then resume the cauterization at your discretion;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 After filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let it stand for an hour and then rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner, the tooth that had moved is confirmed; the softened gums are held steady, and the moisture which was corrupted is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When toothache comes from cold or dryness, and medicinal treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize in the following ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 And cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow and the tip in a spoon of iron or silver;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, mix with butter fat and place on the aching tooth quickly until cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 And thus you often apply it until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; if you see the wool and cotton in butter fat cooled, place on the aching tooth, and keep it hot with a heating instrument until heat comes to the closure of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The fire cautionery involves such instruments that you choose either an iron or copper vessel and make it large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cautionery, which will then be ready shortly afterward, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautionery has cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Often do this, for the pain will subside on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter during this procedure and then lie down again.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and here are the steps for the procedure:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And perform a cautery on the eyelid that you wish to, according to what you can.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 and this is how to do it:
des scrophules	Scrofula is an illness caused by tuberculosis bacteria affecting the lymebones or surrounding lymph nodes, often presenting with swelling on the neck's side. It was commonly treated in medieval times using fire cauterization and other herbal remedies to draw out pus and promote healing.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When the swellings are of phlegm and cold dampness, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the caustic substance as follows, which comes afterwards in this form, and it has two openings for smoke to escape from the other part of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 And apply the hot fire to the abscess once or as needed until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 If the abscess is small, apply caustic according to its size and leave it as such for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And place a piece of woolen cloth soaked in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, treat the leg with ointments and bandages until it is sound.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the vein:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When lymphs overwhelm the ducts in the groin area, especially when it comes from cold complexions, then it is necessary for the patient to be purged first with soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After the fire caustic is applied to the throat's root, ensure that you do not come near the throat and only warm the skin slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After performing another cautery on the joint near the neck at the top of the spine, there is a type called "claviate" which we have seen previously.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and treat it as we have mentioned before until it is sanitized again.
de la toust	When fever overcomes, administer a concoction for reducing heat within the body.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all diseases of the bowels are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an ancient disease, then do two cauterizations on its edges within the veins.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 and another cautery inside between the nipples.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 and there is the type called "claviate" according to the form that has been previously stated.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see it, do cauterization by touching all the type called "points" as in the form that is here for ear diseases.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And let the points reach up to XXX or those around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the head as mentioned before, place the cautery thrice according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauldrons are lighter, as you make three from each one:
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding the shoulder joint dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset in place but cannot remain there, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation immediately.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Afterward, place the patient on their back and along their ribs;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 afterwards, lift up the core that is within the scrotum of your left hand's fingers;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the caustic that has two iron prongs as the shape resembles.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 and cauterize the core until it pierces to the ribs, and then come the shapes with four caustics together.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 and that is why it was made with the caustic that has three iron prongs, so that there are three figures of cauterization.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, it is the shape of the caustic that has three iron prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it positioned on this nerve through which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After placing the fire on the wound to remove scabs with a knife.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 Then let the patient rest and not move their limb for long periods until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which event occurs rarely, then make a cautery on the hollow of the cauline joint or many cauterizations touching each other.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is reduced, and bone is dry and patients are free from pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture until they reach its nature, and there are many catharsis for it, and by usual treatment methods it does not benefit, then patients must be made supine on their back, and stretch out their legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After that, perform three cauterizations under the cup of the foot for the amount equivalent to two ounces at each one, and then make four cauterizations on both sides until they form a triangle shape, with enough space between them so they do not join together when they exude pus.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and the cauterizations should be placed in such a way that they drain from both sides of the knee, and their formation follows this pattern without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you see a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach following this pattern;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 And those who fear this cautery should puncture and burn while pressing above the stomach I times; according to the amount you observe of inflammation.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 Then cauterize thoroughly at all points called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound we have had before, until it is healthy again.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When the liver comes with pain from cold and moisture and excess windiness until it is greatly altered by superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 And the patient is treated according to what we have said in sections, and it does not help them at all, so it must be soothed over their affliction.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 And sign of three fires according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, away from the epigastric regions, where the edges of the wound come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And it should have space between each fire, the width of a thumb;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 And let the cautery be long in shape, and do not squeeze the hand too much on the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 And it should burn only halfway through, and let the patient stand straight.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 And if they cannot, let them lie down, stretch their legs, and lift their arms.
et c’est li forme:	 And here are the forms:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And if you wish to do so, if you are skillful and wise in the art, when cauterizing these cutaneous cauldrons, ensure that you do not burn the entire area, for this would cause all of the body to dry up.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 and that it does not reach the veins, for the tissue is very delicate in this area, and its vessels must be observed.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When there is an abscess on the liver, and you need to know if it is in the liver's flesh or its membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 If it is in the chariot, the patient feels pain but not too severe.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 And if it is on the cloth, he experiences intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And when this treatment requires mirrors, one must place them over the patient's head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 and then determine where the lump or abscess is, and then heat the cautery resembling a grain of wheat;
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 And cauterize with the cautery until the core is burned, and continue to the sciatica, until the swelling is entirely removed;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Afterward, following the treatment of drainage until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And one must not apply this type of cautery without the person having studied extensively in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have spread at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then it is difficult to work, and in every case it seems that he should leave the area undisturbed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	by [un su : (tir; you give meest odonz t fd’s:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said one must make root cauldriform cauteries in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take a longroot of aristology, the largest that you can find, and let it dry, being as thick and long as your thumb.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 and coat the mould in oil, hold it over fire, and make a large caustic at the forefinger joint and little ones slightly downwards on the part below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 and make two caustics between the fifth rib and the seventh, inclining slightly backwards a bit.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 and one on the scrotum, another above the stomach, between the shoulders, and two just below where the caustic was made between the shoulder blades.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not squeeze your hand tightly, but make it open as well as when smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And the ancient ones said that no man should use fire caustics resembling razors, and warm it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And if it causes severe pain as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, as a fistula arises that cannot be healed.
de la mice	It seems like the text got cut off unexpectedly; it says "de la mort."
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease of those parts that we have mentioned in the sections on treatments, and it is not effective at all, then there are three ways of fire cautery, which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 The way to do this is by making I or IV caustics in a line according to the length of the liver, following the shape of the liver caustic as we have described before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 And do not squeeze your hand too tightly during all the caustics, and let the patient lie on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another way of fire cautery is to heat the instrument with two iron rods, as we have shown in shoulder dislocations.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 And lift the bone that is where the pain from the patient's left side originates, and make elevations to raise the bone according to the direction of the injury, following the length of the body, with the fire cautery applied according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After heating the two iron rods until the bone is pierced on the other side, and then pass the fire cautery over it, thus achieving four passes.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see wounds, cauterize the entire area with three passes of the fire cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After curing when it has become congested over long periods, and this is as effective as the previously mentioned cures.
de ydropisie	And for dropsy, which means edema due to fluid retention in the body, causing swelling: apply a concoction of rosen with roses and ointment and pour on l'estuin, et les eaux; puis giete li detergens le morsel de l'eau-lui.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery does not work with epilepsy, only in the manner called "ascluyes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the head, one above the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the loins.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And make sure the cauterization is close to the part that hurts.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After leaving the wound open for long periods of time, do not leave the patient's care after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing would be quicker, and they will together have two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The form of the cauterization for the stomach should be as we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And those who for the back are dislocated, as it was previously explained.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the fingers are swollen in those who have dropsy and are filled with yellowish pus, one must cauterize on their back between the ring finger and little finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And lift your hand with the caustic towards you.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not insert too deeply, in this way it will constrict the yellowish swelling, and apply the caustic according to this form.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After, make two cauterizations on each leg at the ankle joints.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 and let one caustic be long, one from behind near the knee and the other further along the leg, within the thigh.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 and leave the caustics hanging long enough so that the pus can drain out.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 after performing all other treatments as we have mentioned.
de la menoison	For the treatment of menorrhagia: take three roes from a pigeon and two roes from a capercailzie, grind them in wine, then pour it into a bottle with sugar; this should be taken at every meal for a month. Afterwards, if bleeding persists, perform the following procedure:
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When the solution of a cold and wet belly occurs, as long as the retaining and digestive virtue in the stomach and intestines is obstructed, and cannot be treated by various methods.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, so make a significant fire cautery on the stomach as described before or the fire of the stomach, at which point it circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 and four subtle fires around all significant cauterizations, and two cauterizations on the sides of the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of swellings
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When there are old and multiple varicose veins at the foundation or elsewhere, which are large, cold, and damp humors corrupted, and treated as we have divided in sections, and if it does not help, then make cauterizations.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 III on the spine of the back, that which is gradually below the navel and slightly towards the triangle, and a fire cautery under the hipbone at two points.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 and if you think his stomach is cold, and the flesh does not cook, and you see the face swell, then on the face give one great fire cautery as previously described, another at the liver, and another between the ribs with a lancet.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 and leave the fire cautery for long periods of time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the limb until it is sound again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the black substance which is called "theleol"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you come to the heart, if it seems pale, first heat the fire that appears weakened, and then set it all ablaze upon that part of the heart.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and let your hand as well as the fire come to the opening of the vein, from which blood flows.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Once or twice as needed, if there is much thickness, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 After the ointment treatments that are profitable until they heal completely;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 And if you use a large caustic on the thickening, it will have greater benefit.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, we will discuss it in this chapter; if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by caustic treatment.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is an old fistula with decay and putrefaction and corrupted moisture, you must probe it thoroughly entirely, and be sure to know the extent of its front part throughout.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After extinguishing the caustic that appears to be scabbed over, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered inside of it, then repeat the caustic until the body part is restored and corrupted no more, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount needed;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And be wary of burning the nerves that are there, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 If the abscesses reach into the bladder and intestines, beware of these false ones, do not attempt to drain them at random places, and think that they are not persevering.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 After curing the limb until it is clean, and if the false ones are washed away, and the materials have been worn long ago, then understand that the limb is entirely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 And if the materials have not been worn away, deduce that the limb is still infected and corrupts the bone at its source.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 Thus, as with those we mention in their place.
de la maladie des reins	Concerning the illness of kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When cold pain comes in the legs and with great swelling, and has no desire for a woman, then it is necessary to make an incision on both sides of the leg with the pointed caustic lancet that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 If we cauterize it with fire, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will provide greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is heavy and weak from coldness and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you must make a cautery on the part behind the bladder where the hair growth begins at the finger's point, making one on each side, with each as long as our thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 and you make another posteriorly, or two if needed.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 and the cauterization should be made according to the form named in front.
de la marris	Of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the sperm is cold and moist, not allowing it to nourish itself, and the seeds are corrupted with delayed maturity.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, he feels great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then it is time to make three cauteries around the wound as we have said about the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 And let the cauterization be at the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the viscous swellings descend to the thigh's pouch, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 and the lower lump is discovered in the division of muscles, so it must be that you cauterize above the thigh's pouch with one cautery shaped like a circle, and place it before the bone near the pouch as it turns, ensuring the pouch is within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And let the fire cautery be such as those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if this fire cautery is not present, make three olive oil-based cauldrons, and the cautery should be as much in front as all the colors.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and cure it until it becomes healthy again.
de la dolor de la hainche	Pain of the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes from the buttock area, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the section on cold conditions, and treatment does not work, and the disease is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 then it is necessary to purge the patient of large humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good smelling pills that seem similar.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After performing the fire cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 and the manner of doing the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 that is namely with fiery medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cauterization has many methods, among which one is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 that you cauterize on the thigh's pouch with triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make them deep and wide, and there should be space of a thumb between each cautery;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 never do the cauterization in the middle under the head of the thigh, for there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see, if the cautery is done in the circle as we have before said for the thigh's joint dislocation:
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 But do so in a way that the circle contains the entire elbow, and all sides are well-shaped.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And that is how one treats sciatica when the pain occurs in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it reaches to the thigh and leg, make the cauterization where the patient indicates that the pain is located, with four on the foot above the ankle, slightly to the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 And it shall be a woolen caustic plaster, and make the padding thickness as desired.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two of his feet or near them, cauterize where he feels the pain at three points or four on the plaster called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if it works, and if more is needed.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 If the pain is below the groin towards the thigh, then make a caustic at the circular or kitchen knife cautery, and give proper care in all your cauteries that you do not remove too much with the cauterization while burning nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen some who made caustics on the ankle below the knee, and they continued until the leg was fully inflamed, with the bone also affected, which were pierced and consumed entirely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a treatment of the stomach which causes death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the wise ones say in hip cauterization, as follows: make an iron rod approximately as thick as a small oak leaf or slightly less, with gaps between them and enough space from one gap to another equal to the length of a pea.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 and have the gaps at intervals of two parts, and also be as notches, and it must have one inch of well-made iron.
et c’est li forme:	 And here are the forms:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And let it be soaked until all are red and tender, then place it under the bandage of the affected elbow, and twist over the sinewy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 and perform a fire cautery once, leaving for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 then make an embalmment with butter, and leave the wound exposed for long periods of time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after the ointment treatment until it is sound.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Albuquerque says we use little of this fire cautery due to its appearance, and few do so.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 also among the good fire cauteries is one that can suffer it, and where it lodges within.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The fire cautery of medicine is such that you make an instrument with interlocking parts in which to descend the edge of the wound, and it should be made of brass or iron, long enough, and at high heat have two eyes, and between each have the quantity of fat like a spoon.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 and they are to be put above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After placing the vessel of the groin on the sick man lying on his side, and then press your hand much above the vessel of the groin:
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 after pouring between the two circles of the hot cauldron which is heated over fire a little, and let it sit for one hour, and allow the sick man to experience the heat and dryness:
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 When there are also bites like those of fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the bites have passed, raise your hand with the instrument and gently lift the affected arm, leaving it so for three days, and apply fat until what is black from bruising has healed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 and let it rest for three days to prevent swelling;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and this would be the final remedy after ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, make an instrument similar to what you did with the arm.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 and this is how to create a hot compress, which I have written in my treatise on medical corrections.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take an equal amount of alkali and quicklime together, grind them separately, and put in a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 If it has a small opening, so that the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 And place an iron or other suitable metal inside it, and add salt, vinegar, and warm water until there is one handful of powder properly mixed with your hands.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And let it sit so that warm water and lye or metal drain out of it, then collect all the liquid and pour it over vinegar and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And when this is very watery, it will be transformed into a paste of medicinal mixtures and other types of cauterization for different limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 Because it performs a similar work as before, and other medicines with which the heel is well-cauterized like thuya and honey from cashew nuts and vinegard mixed with soap; all these things blended together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galien tells us about a cure wherein an honorable man was healed of the pain in his heel and sciatic nerve, and it greatly helped him; and he said that no other treatment was given, and he recovered once when this cure was done, and then he bathed as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And he says in this manner that you pluck the fresh and dry lettuce leaf, and grind it well with a little fat, and put on the hock and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and leave it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he leaves it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make it enter a bath until the body is somewhat refreshed, and make it lie down to rest, and the pain will leave completely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And understand that no one should use fire cauldrons of such medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat fat candles, it provides much help.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 and should be made as follows:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it over the pit between the thumb and forefinger and the other called phoscoil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 After taking dry goat fat, grasp it with fire until it becomes ashes, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it turns to embers.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 and do so again, continuing this process until you think by touch that it reaches the hock, and the pain is ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 And these methods of cautery are called "cauterization by goat".
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive evacuation, or like cold matter expanding, none of these cases call for cautery unless it is someone who has taken in cold substances.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 After the patient has expelled foul pills or similar substances, apply to his back where he feels pain, three lines marked with dots, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the potency and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 and the cauterization is done as the "points" technique;
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 And if you see it, make III cauterizations or IIII at the middle of the clavicle in this manner:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 Often, this disease comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a narrow chest when they laugh, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 And you reach to the last spine of the back, and its appearance that comes above the others' vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and examine it, apply the fire cautery according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the fire cautery aligns each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see it, use a hot iron around the spine with a pointed instrument making two or three lines, and they should be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the wound until it is whole according to what we have said, be careful not to perform caustic treatment in an area of thickened tissue that contains a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	On the treatment of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When joint pain is from moist swellings that spread to each body part, and when the pain comes in the feet, which people call "gout" properly, and if it is caused by cold conditions and cannot be healed with medicines, then it is treated with cautery as follows:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 Make the mound of cautery around the foot's joint, and let the cautery be in the shape of an olive:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to hold the face down towards the ground, make sure to perform caustic treatment all over with a hot iron marked "no point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pains come near to the knee and other joints, which often happens, then perform one cautery on each kneecap, either three or four in each part, using the entire olive-shaped cautery:
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you need to do more, then do so, but do not hold the fur of your hand until the skin becomes white.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, treat it with the fire cautery as we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if pain is in the hands, make marks around the forefinger and middle finger.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there remains no pain in the toes, make marks above each joint and on the hand's hair.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 and if pain comes near to the ankles or shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care for the patient and prepare remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of them and purge phlegm, they will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the treatment for scrofula
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When boils come in groups and pus drains down to the joints anew, it is necessary that when you see them burst, do not mix the medicines of that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And he must use things that ease his stomach so that the fetus descends from it.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 After the child has been born, he should sit on his back between your hands, and command that he washes his ankles until the veins are repaired, and bend his arms at your elbebows, and tie off above the cut of the thumb-bone, and with a sign resembling three-quarters of a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then warm the caustic which has this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and tastes sweet.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then reset the bones to their place.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 and instruct the servant to wash his hands so that they do not return backwards.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 and work well on the legs of the ill person, and place a pillow under them and the servant above their thighs, and another beneath their feet as they wash their hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then place the fire cautery over the mark with all your hand, and hold it straight and steady until you reach the bone; if not on the first attempt, then try again another time until you go as far as the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 And be subtle that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 so that you do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 and by this the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach up to the bone with the cautery, your works are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and also larger for grown people according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three days heal the wound with butter until the burn is scabbed over.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After other remedies with ointments until it is healthy again, and let the sick person lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that his nourishments be consumed thoroughly, so that the wound does not break out when he attempts to get up into a bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after forty days, when he wishes to stand, if he binds himself with a well-made bandage, and wears it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 and he should have good rest, that he works little and watches against too much drinking of liquor and eating, and yelling loudly.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when he follows this instruction, then it will be completely healthy again.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of tailors in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the abdominal pain treatment.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When ulcers come to other bodies and become known, and you see that they no longer grow, do the fire cautery as needed according to its quantity, and be careful of the third part (pertaining to size).
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 After curing it according to what we have said.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 And none of the old ones have said that you should causticate with fire at three angles in this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first mark the head of the enge and make a line for the width above the route, and another below, and keep your hand amidst all the fire cautery pointedly.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first fire cautery is lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain persists for a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it should be cauterized with a caustic called "poins", according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, power, location of twists, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 If it is safe after the first cauterization, it's well done.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If not, continue with another cauterization on that spot because the usual practice is that it should be moved to the member closest to it, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healthy again.
de meselerie	Messelecy or massage therapy
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The pain has been eased any number of times by caustics with great help, especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 Can you not see it cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in that division, and neither progresses nor recedes, and you doubt that corruption will affect the entire sickness, then make V cauteries on top of the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I put one above the crown and the other at the end of the eyebrows.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 and two on the temples, and one behind near the ear.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 and leave your hand so the cauterization reaches up to the bone, and as long as scars emerge from it, allowing vapors of thick humors to escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 and cauterize underneiss on top according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And if the bruises are scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 And if it is clearly visible, then you shall use the cauteries we have mentioned earlier: one at the top of the hand, another on the spine of the neck, six along the spine of the back, a large one over the navel and others near it, and two above each shoulder.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 and two on each ribcage, two over the knee joints, one over each hand joint, and above the palms.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 and beware of any veins that are visible behind them, do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 and never perform a cauterization on the bone of the wrist or the bone of the stomach, nor on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that the more you do with cautery, the more it helps him, and he benefits from movement.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the patient does not feel pain with cautery as a healthy one would, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it must be that the caustic treatment is large and small according to the members and joints, depending on what you find in handling iron rods.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing them with a poultice of wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until they are sound.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it's not healthy yet, then you make cautery on the limb according to its size and severity.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 and let the cautery be slightly intruding into the area of concern.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat with ointments until it becomes healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And never make cautery and to the hand and foot and back, at the place of nerve that moves the limb, and so there is swelling.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And at all times do not interfere unless one is familiar with the limbs and the exits of the nerves traversing the body.
de albaras	The use of cautery to address swelling in specific areas necessitates careful application based on the affected limb's dimensions; a slight penetration into the skin is advised for visibility. Subsequent treatment should include ointments until healing occurs. Additionally, cautery has been applied to extremities and spine locations associated with nerve function that can lead to bone deformity when not properly managed; however, intervention in such cases should be avoided unless the practitioner is knowledgeable about muscle functions and neurovascular pathways within the body.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" is old, and medical methods are of no use, then cauterize with a caustic agent slightly by its edge, according to the amount determined by the severity, until the discoloration is removed, and it changes color.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 then apply a poultice of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colt's leg and crane bird (swan), one part each.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then mix all together, bind with a cloth, and place hot stones underneath until it is properly healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a sore begins to appear and you can see it, cauterize with the cautery that appears as a circle all around the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And yet the wise say to do cautery as well with millet poultices for cankers.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 And yet it does not seem good to me, as I have found them often becoming ulcerated and corrupted.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And more appropriate it is that they be cauterized around the "circulating" cautery, as we have said in many treatises on cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot die out
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying either due to excessive secretion or the state of the patient being weakened (that is, too old) with little blood.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 and you observe them hastening to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 Then you must cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After this, let it be as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 For she will delay dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, heat the cautery of which there is a shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the midst of that illness called "adubeati" until it feels like burns, and let the caustic burns be such that the patient senses them behind as if following the course of inflammation.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another manner of disease called "corrodens," which is nothing but a mixture affecting the limbs, as it consumes them like dry branches are consumed by fire.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in place that can suffer a burning together with fire, then fan the small and large cauldrons as much as needed depending on where the body or illness is located.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After you have burned all parts until you remove the entire corruption, and nothing remains of it, let everything that is corrupted be consumed by fire.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it rest for three days and apply wet compressions with oil until the burns from fire have healed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying oil treatments that produce heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three days no wound heals, this is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if not, resume the burning on that which remains from the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 This mixture has sometimes been treated with cold water as a fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 But always, the fire cautery is of greater help; and I have already described the treatment with cold water in its application.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 Take the quantity that you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of pus that comes to the joints.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often in the feet there arises a disease which we call "clot" and it is a significant swelling that presses on the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatment for this disease is as follows: two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is known as fire cautery, and water cautery hot.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 The fire cautery is one that you heat like a penny on a hearth, and it should be made of good iron to pierce through the nail in all directions, and have fine edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 After heating it thoroughly on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it becomes red with heat.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 and let it remain like this for three days until it begins to produce pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then make an emplaster of well-ground henbane mixed with wax, and leave the plaster on throughout the night, and it will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the limb with soothing ointment until it is healed cleanly.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are infected towards the rear of the body, and it happens many times in hands and feet, then you must treat with a hot water cauterization.
et est en teil maniere:	 and occurs in such a manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 take a needle of copper or iron, or a spatula of silver, and place it on the splinter and the flesh underneath, that is to say for removing warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 and insert the needle so that it perforates all around, then place some hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you rotate until the edge of the needle reaches to the root of the splinter, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply up to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 And the patient suffers a little from the sting of warm water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then let it be so, and it will uproot all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do another after the other, touching all that are on the body, then treat them with ointments containing wax.
li cure dou trembler	them on; This is not to: est untines a la chauges until the be it. The time that tand rele your de ouga:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 When some suffer from shivers due to coldness or fever quaternary (fourth degree) or another type, it is necessary for you to perform four cauterizations above the spine of the back, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 and one on the navel with an olive cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 if this will make them shake, and it shall rid them of the illness' cold sickness.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 In no case become apparent from behind in bodies bathed or pus-filled, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 if at first they appear that a cautery is made upon each head of the pustule:;
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 A subtle cautery made of poplar wood, so that the tip is gripped by fire, or from a long yew root, or on a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And never should you cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but it breaks off the excess that comes from them, leaving clean.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 But it is necessary that this be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Often great harm to the artery occurs when it is cut at the wound edge, or during an abscess incision, or on limb cauterization, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And this is a very serious thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 And yet when this happens to anyone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very much until the blood ceases below your finger, and it no longer flows out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 Then apply fire to olive wood cauldrons of various sizes until they are all red-hot.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then take one large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is located, place the cauldery over that vein while holding your finger in place, and hold the cauldron until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	When it bursts out as you lift your elbow over the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And continue doing so one after another until the bleeding has ceased.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 And be cautious not to burn the nerve near it and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 And you say that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be properly tied up on its own, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 Or through cauterization, or through extracting when it cannot be treated well, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And is tied and strained temporarily.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will perform the proper closing of straining tightly with cloth or applying burning substances above, or similar things; if it does not benefit greatly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if it happens to anyone who has no remedy or medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb index over the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch out well until bleeding is stopped above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And he must not move it, but keep the cold wet cloth on it often as needed until the blood is congealed and thickened.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 Then make incisions forward as required for cauterization and application of medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatment methods.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and blisters, pus, efflorescence, and the appearance of burn marks.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I have included that chapter on the head up to the temples, and I will go through this chapter by the same method for what is found more easily therein.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauteries, hence greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision into an abscess, and wound treatments, and arrow extractions, and incision for stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 When there is doubt and fear, death comes to many others.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you to not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways that people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 If they come from those who have suffered so much with their illness that they die easily due to the severity of their disease and its magnitude.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And one must fear such things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And there are some who lose their mind, saying:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Wait, I am healed;
et li maladie est despitouse.	 and the illness is defiant.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 You should not easily give in to those who approach you with this behavior, but show greater compassion than greed, and do not hastily undertake what you are sure of and have confidently accepted.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 And make use of prediction and guidance for directing treatments to your patients so that health may be restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 And this will assist you in gaining good reputation, glory, and the memory of the Lord.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son of our lords, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as seen in the chapter of cauteries that I have explained from head to toe, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water within the head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 Know that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the child's head is pulled too hard.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 At no time does this result occur if one knows how to reset it properly.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and all those I have seen succumb quickly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 and therefore it seems to me that one should not attempt healing in these cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the skull grew each day until it could no longer bear.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 and believed so much in the water that they died, and this swelling is accumulated under the bone above the suture between the skin and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 and such treatments are when the swelling is between the skin and the bone, and abscesses are small, so you should make a wide incision into the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And let it last as long as the moisture flows.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 and this is the form of a swelling.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is too much moisture and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs of gaps in both ends of each part, and it feels sharply when pressed with your hand into the density, and this has not been set right.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 if it is necessary to split between the head in three cuts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision, remove all the pus thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After straightening the edges of cloth and powders, and putting wine and oil, leave it so until the fifth day.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to straighten evenly, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way of incision is to look at the size of the abscess and the gathering of water.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 for it never lies before;
aucune fois derrier;	 for it never lies behind;
aucune fois en destre;	 for it never lies on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	 And never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 So that you may cut where there is an abscess, and the filling of water, and do according to your ability.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 And be careful not to cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 and have a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from its slowing and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	To restore
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and the illness is long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is to perform cauterization with the tool used to tie off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 It is therefore necessary, when you see it covered, that the patient raise his head again.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 After rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the veins appear, then draw out all of the patient's collar.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 Then look and see where the vein runs, and the lips of one and other are behind the ears, and few have returned.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 First mark the edges of the wound with a tie, then cover both sides with a strip measuring two fingers in width, continuing until it reaches the bone or is as wide across the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, tie off the artery with a stitch from above and cut it just as two points cross over.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is opened, blood flows continuously from it.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the vein does not open upon feeling it, you must measure a space of three fingers in length, then tie and cut up to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 and ensure that the correct amount of blood is removed if it's six ounces or so, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 if it remains above the bone without a flap of skin, and there are no signs of an abscess when you cut into it, then strain the wound, bandage it, and apply poultice until it is healed.
de emigrainne	From gouty inflammation
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When gouty inflammation comes early and catarrh with moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headaches and such things occur, if it is treated by various medical methods of medicine and nothing benefits him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have discussed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 The manner of their extraction is such that the patient makes his hairs on the temples and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is not easily replaced as with some men who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 And if it is replaced, the patient must strain their neck with a piece of cloth, then rub their head with an abrasive cloth, and apply warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take the spatula whose form is as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 Then carefully scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the edges with forceps, and separate well the threads that are opposite each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 If the arrow is fine, then bind to the elbow's tip, and bandage that area according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If not properly reduced, it will never regain full function again at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 And treat for six days up to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the arrow is large, it should be tied in two layers of strong, double-threaded silk cord to prevent rotting at the wound site and ensure blood flow.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then bandage the excess between the two layers at the same time, and then, if you see fit, use the fire caustic cautery up to the bone until the joints are sealed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 This is the work done if the patient does not have a fever and is of warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 Because the fire cautery is used to end swellings.
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 For this reason, it is of greater assistance for swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 Or, when extracting the veins, one should fill the place with fine cotton and apply well-made bandages.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when they are removed, use dry medicinal mixtures that promote healing and bandages until it is safe.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the artery is severely torn as you work on it, quickly apply heat with cautery, and place the location of vinegar there and stretch your hand so that the wound heals.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if it is not apparent, then cover the place with mustard until the wound hardens, and apply cold water to the area until it ceases, and bind it as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And those who are skilled and more adept in the extraction of an artery should cauterize the vein with this sharp fire caustic at two parts, but the sharpness be well spaced to preserve heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when inflammation is too hot, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And it should have between the two knives a space of size I, and then when you grasp both edges with your hands, heat the iron until it glows up to the bone, and cut the vein in two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 and be distanced between the two eyes because this fire caustic is not suitable for all cases;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the form of the fire caustic:
des larmes	By tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears from the eyes descend into veins near the forehead, and there is no benefit from medicines applied, and you see the patient's face turning red, and feel a pulsation in their temples as if with fear.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And those wounds are held and kept moist so that the hairs of the paper become detached, and the papers wither, and scorched by the heat of tears, if such care is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And they call it the "old contusion treatment," and you must do this to the patient who has this disease: shave the hair from his forehead, then make three cuts or equally spaced according to the width of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 and one of the cuts shall be made so that it runs up the middle of the forehead to the hairline, and the others are placed two fingers above the eyebrows, but take care not to incise the arteries that lie two fingers above the eyebrows.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And position your hand with the continuation of two jawbones, so each wound is as wide as three fingers' breadth.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And have an esponge and two cloth pieces to apply pressure for stopping the bleeding, then insert the styptic made of three parts as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 From the incision which goes from the temple up to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 And scrape off all the core that is between the two openings completely through to the sac above the bone, then make a new cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this styptic substance.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "culterale" in the first cut, and it is very sharp on one side, but also soft so not cutting, and that is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And make the bandage cutting toward the chest near the heart, and the ribs soft to the bone, and continue until it reaches the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And tie off all vessels coming from the head that are visible until the incision is continuous up to where the core opens, and then make another cut in the middle opening to the other end.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 And then extract blood evenly, and express the place to locate the taken blood.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 Then place a piece of fine cotton in each cut, and cover with cloths soaked in wine, oil, and honey, ensuring that abscesses do not form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days heal the wounds, then apply a large amount of boiled water soak, followed by curing with basic oil of Basil, and other remedies used for treating wounds until they are well-healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eye sockets
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When someone comes with severe and chronic inflammation, and you see the eyes swoln and small, causing blurred vision, and burnt papers.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 And the hair falls out, and at the top there is sharp pain, and the patient sneezes.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 Then from these incidents it is said that such matters and those chills come only from many veins, and the muezzin cares for where they are located, if so be this is true.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you command the sick person to turn their head backward, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one twice as wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And it begins from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and remove your hand from the glands in the temples that move during eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is revealed, let all the blood be absorbed by a sponge, then place it between the two lips of the incision and insert old cotton, and try with thread;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 Then lay the cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and protect it from heat abscesses.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When it is inflamed, if necessary, rub the bone until pus starts to form, then treat with things that dry out sores, encouraging healing of wounds.
En teil maniere:	 In such a way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of opium, and make into paste.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 Apply to these wounds to encourage healing completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 All that oozes from the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 either grains of sand, or beast matter, or bits of stone, or similar substances like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 or seed, such as crop residues, peas, and beans.
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 Or when something flows out like water, easily and with similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it bleeds in the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows within the ear, then set the ear on the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the stone, if it drips any bit of violet oil or linseed oil, then perform an extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 and the person has a condition causing them to sneeze, and they block their nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place cloth or woolen strips near the ears.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 and stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 It often happens by this treatment.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it does not come forth, then a delicate extraction is performed with the following method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it comes out through the pinchers, that's good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, then perform an extraction with a fine filament of thin doubled thread;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 And if it does not come through there, make a funnel of iron and push the top of the funnel or small hole in the ear firmly, then stuff the area around the funnel with soft wax so that winds cannot enter.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 Then treat it with a form of fire, as often times wind comes in this way as we have mentioned;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 And if it does not come in any way, take pine resin and place the birds there, and use some instrument of sharp point for this purpose, and put some cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 Then press the pine resin onto the stone or any other thing, and treat with fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if it does not come from any of the things we have said, hurry to split the ear so that pus may enter and there is a swelling.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 The manner of the incision is such that you first elevate the patient's head, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the root of the ear near the fat or bone.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And make the incision like a crescent, as you reach towards the bone, then squeeebreze it with your mouth powerfully.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And apply the dressing until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if there are pus and it swells, perform an incision for drainage.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it cannot be drained, then prepare a spatulum gently in this manner:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And perform an incision on that stone.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not attempt this when you think the grain is soft due to ear moisture, until you have done it many times.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Then carefully extract using tweezers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Once the grain has thus entered into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with a first conditioning, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And be careful on that same ear where he is afflicted.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it falls out by itself, this is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 If not, if you take many pieces according to the length of your thread that are thin and light, heat them a bit in fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 And then instruct the patient to insert one or two pincers into his ear, and remove them from there with their pieces on the other side, and extract another stone underneath the stone that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 And continue to remove stones from stone to stone until all moisture has dried up and so it will heal completely.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see it, then take the joint and insert one head into the ear, and the other head remains until the less painful joint is achieved.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 Then reset the rest of the joints as needed until all are aligned, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In extracting a thorn, if it is of small size, as though insignificant and similar to others, treat it as we have said in the section on surgery.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 but if it is a large thorn that can be felt, then prepare for using forceps for its removal.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 and this is the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In extracting worms from the ears, as you care for them as we have said in the section on surgery and dealing with pus, if the treatment does not work, it is necessary to examine the ear under sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If there are any worms, if they treat with subtle pinchers, and if they do not appear, then take the bone of which this form is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it must be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And insert the more subtle part into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then shape it fully with the bone.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Do this often until all veins are healed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not obey to be removed, then plug around the bone with cotton as I have said in the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer the dilutions that the ancients have tried in the incision of worms, and you will find or treat with dilutions.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you drip your oils and medicines into the ear of this instrument, which is why it takes on such form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And [it] be made of silver or gilded brass from the small holes, and above them for pouring.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And to ensure the pressure of distillation within an adequately made copper instrument for this purpose, and if you see [it], wrap it with tinder and cover around the tip promptly with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines into the vessel, and let it be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then [you] fill up all the tinder with cotton and press your hand quickly as long as the oil is dripping or filling of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And he feels pain inside, and there should be a distillation of the pus, which is then applied to fire as such that it's distilled in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And ensure it is not too cold, for the medicines would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without any eyebrows or ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And this same thing happens at home due to bleeding from a wound or discharge in the ear, and these eflusions often come partly into the ear so that it cannot be seen.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 And sometimes there is no trace of bleeding, and he sees well again.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 Therefore, if it comes into the ear and cannot be seen, it signifies a serious healing in various conditions, and when one sees this, you should place the patient's ear to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	 And look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 If you see swelling visible, then assess whether the operation involves all of this stretching area from which it takes shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And so be the ears and incision in front and behind, all flat, if they do not pierce the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 If the swelling is from a jaw or body of the ear, take it with delicate tweezers and gently cleanse, until all bones are removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the swelling is found in the ear, take a fine and delicate razor and dry it slightly over fire, then return the body of the ear to its place.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you sense swelling causing the patient pain upon hearing, pierce it lightly, and ensure not to burden the ear's nerves.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Then insert a tent in the ear according to its width at the opening and grease with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Do this for any day until the wound is dry; then take a tent and apply fresh red mud, and powder with crushed vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see the ear flare up, it is fitting to strip off the tent and apply another tent with mud from a ceramic bowl mixed with rose oil and wax until the inflammation subsides.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then let it heal until it becomes healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and wrap in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood discharge such as distillation therapy.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This ointment that comes from paper when it is wet and dry, you must extend with tongs and tweezers, and wrap the stem in a piece of spatulary root;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then apply freshly crushed vitriol on top.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if not removed by dissection, then cauterize with the pointed cautery after incision so it may move.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 and often repaired, as nothing remains from their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots become burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	les que he as a l'ard; that t s;t; puis quivide le ; theta; J.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times they come as paper-thin things that appear gritty in form and hardness, and thus this disease is called "granulation," consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below the skin.
li ovraiges est telz:	 its nature is such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 take heed if granulation moves on either side, and this is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Make it wide open, then the scraping of each part gently, then take it with forceps, and bind it up.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 If you cannot cover it without slightly piercing the paper, nothing will harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 And if the crack is large, assemble with stitches and treat until it heals completely.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 And if it is small, do not apply too much pressure, as the ointments will restore it quickly and cause redness.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the bubo descends into the depth of the ear towards the upper area, reverse the paper and extend it with forceps, bandage, and press on both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 And if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 When hail is collected, cleanse the oil of salted water, and treat the wound from which it originated until the patient recovers well.
de la graisse des eulz	And wash the wound thoroughly with water and soap to prevent infection.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Epilepsy is a fat that arises in the loins from papers over, and it happens more often in children than adults, grievously affecting their eyes, causing them to have convulsions at dawn, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 And because of this, they lie on their faces downwards, sleep on their backs, and have swollen papers under their damp eyelids that appear covered by epilepse which manifests in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you apply pressure to the joint with your hands, feeling something pass through inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of treatment is such that the patient places his head on a pillow.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 And then he takes a cloth of linen and makes a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained by each part, then places it on him.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 and press his thighs from both sides so that the swelling is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 then make an incision in the middle of the swelling with a sharp scalpel, and it should not be wider than the wound made on the vein's edge;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 and cut through the skin as you find the swelling.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 and in various cases, swelling arises from the incision, according to the shape of a white lump of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Pull out all at once a piece of patched cloth between your two fingers towards the dislocation, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And ensure that you do not pinch at the tear, that you do not spread it all over the area up to the bone, and do not crush it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if the swelling does not open at the beginning of the tear, slightly elevate the tear until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then extract as we have said, then moisten cloths with warm water and vinegar, place them on the site, and bind it securely.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And for those men who grind and place them there to spoil the moisture that has lingered.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the healer treats it until it is sound again.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes to a head, then the healer treats with warm plasters until it is sound again.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from paper strips
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When hairs appear that are misaligned and aged, they harm the eyes, and bring about familiar ailments like tearing and softening of the papers and algae, until it causes the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And there are four methods of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 Or by fire caustery alone, or by medicinal ague according to what is prescribed in the chapter on caustery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or with poultices as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the page of oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it turns well, it is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 if not, place an arrow through all the thread above.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and be it near the edge of the paper or where hairs grow near these threads, cut the thread along all the paper, then turn it smoothly.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then make at the part below the parchment, below the hairs close to it, along the entire length of skin and tissue, from the great shoulder down to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then extract the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth beneath the parchment, then sign on the parchament with an impression as like a raspberry leaf, ensuring that the figure is according to the quantity you see raised in the parchment which is exposed to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if there's a part that requires coping with a large quantity of the parchment according to how much the parchment is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 Then make on all the tissue above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the large shoulder down to small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 And it should be one of the openings near natural hair growth in the skin's thickness at a root, then insert the needle into one of its corners with care, and scrape thoroughly.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then stitch together the two lips with a running stitch using one thread of fine woolen yarn, and drain any blood, and trim excess threads near both eyebrows without leaving anything sticky.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 And if not, do nothing about it, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 Then treat the wound without dry or constricting stitches as the paper becomes loose from the wound and its healing process, but the stitch is loosened (as the ancients say), which is a work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 If by another method:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And you guide the paper into a shape similar to the hollow of a fir tree as we have described, with three times around in accordance with the form shown here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cover what supports the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 And if you cannot hold the tongs and the item is not evenly shaped, then take a needle or one with a single thread, and place it within the hollow of the fir tree.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 and take another thread near the larger branch, and the second thread near the smaller one, and join between them the threads evenly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have marked, as we have described, then unite the two edges of the wound by stitching them together, and heal until it is healthy.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing oil.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 And there are times when the hair of the papyrus is turned:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 If it becomes necessary to use what we have said about the incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 But the stitching on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of ulcers follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 And you shall convert the papyrus and extend it inside as I have said, then make the ulcers by craft, with fine threads as long as the width of the stretcher is wide.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 And cut at both ends where you hold the threads:
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 Then carefully join one and the other according to what is on top of the papyrus strips, and straighten both ulcers from each part.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And let it lie thus for a while, and the skin which is strained will die, weaken, and tear until it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If delayed, if the copa has some strengths, then treat it so that it becomes healthy again;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 and when the wound is healed quickly, and if the papyrus is raised, then no more hair will grow there.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 and it is the shape of the two cannulas that you shall make according to this form, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 the methods are such that you take a fine needle, and tie one end of silk thread which is soft and subtle.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 then gather the heads and neatly twist each one subtly, making the lengths of threads a span long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 Then order a fine thread of other delicate silk briefly, and do not let it twist.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then place the patient's head in your hand.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And be close to the sun so that the operation can be spoken of, for it is a subtle and delicate task, then insert the needle into all threads at the root where the hair grows, cutting through until you reach just beyond the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then extract the hair to its root and pull out that strand of hair, whether one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then remove your hand as the hairs turn to face away from all directions on the paper with natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the wound is treated and hair does not grow with it, you will treat the wound from below along the entire thread that you have ordered, until the hair grows above the opening and you see it through the oil's vision.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Then you will treat the wound and the thread, cover it with oil for two or three days until the hair hardens in its place and new growth appears.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hair is short, accompany it with long natural whiskers and raise it to match those you left behind until they are separated and then remove them.
de la porriture de l’oil	And when you can be thread after them that case, and soil not too much oureatement the place until sile tooth a tides of time or long; et leli the filz, as the dents hairs the luex. 5 days.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this disease called 'aleacrati' occurs in the eye, it can happen in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 One natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens by sudden injury, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the manner of treatment in it is that you split the seam, separate its lips, and fill with flax threads inside, and clean until it's healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 and one must only use in its treatment things that dry out and tighten.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but with works that soften, like fennel;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 And the rose of water or herbs be boiled with flaxseed, and anointments of diacron melted in any oil, and one wraps a tent around it, and applies this remedy to that area.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the essence of your treatment is to ensure you do not bind or wrap it according to its original shape.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and these treatments that we have mentioned are solely directions for this disease, so it does not return in the shape it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the chariot entering the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness that is truly called "axacrati," is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The occurrence comes from a wound and laceration as well as cauterization and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the manner of the treatment is to take an awl where it has a double thread, insert the head into the hole, and pierce from left to right so that both threads come out on either side.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then they apply heat above all needles, and a cup at the site of the abscess.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 and if not, take scissors and place them in the tear, then turn back the paper, making cuts or stitches within the folded paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 and let the shoulders have cuts at both angles of the incision you made, and make them with such angles that when they are joined together, their shape is like an 'N' in the alphabet.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 then remove that heat, according to the amount of cloth used, as it should secure the paper, and bring together the two separated parts with a woolen thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the care of what we have said about soothing medicines and bandages, as long as it is suitable.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the disease comes from a laceration or incision or cauterization, it is fitting that you make a clean cut below the hairline of the papers (skin), and according to what has been said above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 then place between two leaves of bandage as I have mentioned;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 and the treatment must be made according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise instruments of all possible means so that they can restore its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 and the patients themselves, according to what is needed for treatment and provisions in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	In adherence to the paper's method
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this suture occurs in men's hands such that the paper above is sealed with egg white and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it upwards.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 and the extension to pinchers, using what is sharp enough for a delicate incision, neither too dull nor too cutting, so that the patient does not suffer from an incision that is too deep or blunts the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 and make your incision, scraping it lightly, so that the paper can return to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 and cleanse the entire assembly, ensuring no contact with dirty water, instead using soft water and cream.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then place a tent of lin between the paper and oil, and put woolen yarn abundantly on top.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days utilize the bandage and other dressings until it is healed sufficiently.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 Know that the ulcer occurs in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 It is either of the nervous kind and appears hard like syphilis, and another which is not nervous but resembles a frozen moist sore, that when touched with iron and cooked over embers does not heal.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 And both appearances begin near the great temples and grow slowly until they cover all sight and light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the method of incision is that the patient places their head on a pillow, then works out the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 And lift the paper to your hand, then cut with the clippers of small double-edged blades, and extend above.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take a needle, and insert horsehair, or wool, or ox hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 Then slightly bend the tip of the needle and insert it into the eyelet, pierce through the entire needle, tie the needle with a thread, extend above, shave all hair to the edge of the eyelet that rubs against the hole, then cut off the remaining stump close to the head, carefully peel back the skin over the lacrimal bone and delicate tissues, leaving natural tear duct or socket so that by the incision it does not naturally run down as usual;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 And there has been no time when the nail was solely extended at the joint or along the shaft, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then scraping is done where all the skin and subcutaneous tissue are involved in which this shape is found:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the scraping does not touch the fleshy tissue and tear it, and that the puncture is not made.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And after the incision, apply some sallad to it and wrap with a cloth made of lead, and leave until the following day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat as required until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the nail is not of a nervous nature and you cannot insert the needle, and the knobs do not enter, often this appearance of a fingernail has been treated with remedies.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And so that they grow as I have described in the procedure, and if you cover it, work on the oil of the patient, and take a light-weight spatula according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And gently pluck the nail above and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a rapid onset, then distill from your mouth into an oil made of litargire and red bile blended with silk broiled, and stuff the oil until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 then resume the other procedure as this same work, until it is all gone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no other matter opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then first treat the abscess until it is healed, and resume the work as before, until it is healthy again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of flesh at the temple disturbs in oil by great harm, then suspend it to an oncicle and cover part but not all, that no tears come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then let flow on the red choleric oil, which is made of litargo.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the hair that grows over the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 Then some people have hair that is sometimes red, covering the gums and tied up at the edges and twisted into loops; it appears as a baluster rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 and the operations are such that the patient must put his head in pain, then work on his hair, curling it all into convenient loops like nails, and hold them with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 then clip the first one, and shave all around it down to the end, and be sure not to pull on the hair at the work site.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 and be the incision of the strain that we have mentioned in the cutting of the nail and small forces where one takes off their eyebrow, as shown by how this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 When the incision is completed and all the bone is exposed, apply the oil of silex or distilled red collier medicines with corrosive properties, and place cotton soaked in oil above it to ensure the abscess is heated.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 If there is no discharge and pus accumulates, causing the abscess to swell, and you suspect a heated abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling agents.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work once it is clean, thus making bones aligned in the oil with this treatment.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 However, you must always balance the treatment of each weakened part by following natural ways;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 And from an accidental injury while working with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
des voines des eulz	From veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red swellings that are covered over with oil, they impair the vision and weaken the eye daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 Therefore, in the first place you look where the pain is located, which part it is, and if there is nothing else but swelling.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then do so as follows:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 instruct the patient to place his head in your hands, then suspend those veins along the entire arm according to your wisdom, and let the nerves be subtle twice as per this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there shall be two veins by degrees in one course as follows:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 then you do so with those veins subtly, and extract the blood gently afterward, until you see that the veins are free of pain.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And keep in mind not to blister the oil at the tips of the stumps, and perform this work at noon before sunlight, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not miss any veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And when this is done, if you distill on the colored oil (vermilion and red) to cleanse what remains in the root.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you cannot collect it all at that hour, then apply plaster with substances soothing eye pain, and leave them for several days until the pain is eased and confident of no inflammation, then continue as before until they are healthy.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And this is the form of power:
de la fistule de l’oil	For the oil abscess.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The mirrors are called "arrisatis" ducts.
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you treat it with cautery and fiery ague as I have previously described, if it is not healed, then create a channel in the abscess where it should die, and draw out all the pus that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and darkness, return all the instruments that are in its form.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 and it is called "aspré chie," and let there be fire made from iron to the tip of that instrument, and sharpened as in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And place it on the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand until you know that corruption is removed.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And do this each time, then restore it to its original position with exciting medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the joints are stiff and swollen, and the body of the bow is rigid, and remains so for forty days, and does not heal nor develop abscesses, and if no harm occurs, be assured it is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If not, if there is no other remedy but to bring the hernia back through the hole in the neck as follows:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And you must expose the bone a second time with iron and ague medicines; when it is exposed, take a fortress as follows: let the shoulder be made of iron in three angles, and the rod should be tapered to the head as seen here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then place it near the bone by the cheekbone and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn completely until you pierce the bone and feel the patient's pain as if it were in your own neck if they hold their hand over their nose.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And then restore the bone with dry medicine as I have instructed you, and when pus forms and hardens in the bones, it goes towards the nose.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If it is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the nostril
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When all the nerves have been opened fully and they do not cause any disturbance to the nose or thinning, then you should bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then cleanse it, then apply suction cups or a heated iron to draw out blood without burning, then place oil made of acacia and aloe, incense, and sarcocolla on the eye that was affected, and then strain the oil, and wrap with bandages and linens.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 The manner of bandages is such that you choose enough soft cloths, and fold each one fourfold, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed by the wounds.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then stretch it above a hard bandage board and begin again with blisters to draw out blood without causing harm.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then remove the blisters and let it remain strained day and night, and if possible soften the tissue, then extract generously.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see it healing, that is good.
se ce non;	 If not so;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you resume the poultice and bandages, ligature, and blisters until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The fall of a sheet or cloth used (in context likely referring to surgical dressing)
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When disruptions occur on the used cloth, then torn, and coming forth from paper as fine grains of resin, and is hope-giving to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Then if you see it heal, the operations are such that you insert a needle at the root of the part from below up to above, then insert another needle or there be two threads on the upper edge.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 and pierce it further, leaving the first needle according to its arrangement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then cut the second thread and tie a part of the eyelid around it, stretching well, then remove the needle and place oiled cloth abundantly over the eye.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 and leave until the threads fall off with the eyelid, then treat with comforting ointments until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And at no time is the wound constrained by a veil from each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the eyes give a large appearance, when through a subtle stab at the bottom of the eye appears, and it passes through the white matter and descends into the eye, and enters almost immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then extract until healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Regarding the bowels of the wound
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease known as "alcunati" is not merely bowing that appears in the eye resembling water descending, and it is not actually water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 and the way it appears is that you make the patient sit on a specially prepared chair and straighten up, then take his head between your hands from both sides, until you see the bow coming above their eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then it is fixed firmly, and does not descend or become dislodged, allowing the patient to see properly as usual.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 And if it does not descend again, you should believe that it is healed, and the displacement of the bowstring has been corrected as we have stated.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine styptic and apply it under the sclerosed cornea slightly by the continuous use of the ointment on the sclerosed cornea and the crown, until the bowstring heals.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it is healed, then apply the warm oily mixture with honey or water and fenugreek that has been boiled, followed by another remedy until it becomes healthy again.
des aigues de l’oil	from eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have found similarities to water in its separation, and what must be done for cutting.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 If in the work according to one's health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crosswise, away from sunlight and oil anoint his body, firmly gripping.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then place the oil paper on your left hand if the eyes are left-oriented or on your right hand if the eyes are right-oriented.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-oriented, the instrument called "almandine," or with your left hand if the eyes are right-oriented.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 Then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by moving it like a ray into that corner of the oil on the lower part of the eye socket, and insert the instrument called "almandine" firmly, and twist your hand until it pierces through to the other corner of the oil, feeling as almandine enters the hollow.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 It is proper that the measure of the Almadad way be at the forefront of the space from the plum to the end of the elbow.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 and it is the bend of the arm;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 If you see the bone on that paper due to the whiteness of the tissue, then place the instrument up to it or where the vein is, and squeeze out another way afterward.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If they go numb now, look at the patient's face and the instrument against his palm.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 Afterward rest for a while, and when the vein rises again in the second way, apply force with the instrument, and once it is firmly inserted and does not rise further, gently remove Almadad by slightly twisting your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 And then introduce a little bit of tying thread, and let the arm inside out.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert the stopper or softened linen in oil and wax abundantly, and seal with clean flesh.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 And those of our time, apply a poultice with plenty of wax.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the splinter cannot enter through the bone due to its hardness, as some people have overly hard nails, it is necessary that you use an instrument called 'alberit', of which this shape exists:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And pierce then the joint solely, and do not go too far in depth, but make it subtle, then apply medicinal plaster, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And for the completion of the work, prepare an appropriate cushioning for the patient to lie on their back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 And keep them from all movement, and provide light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left, and bind them securely according to their position until the third day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 Then remove them to the same dark house and test their vision, allow them to see things, and then reapply the bandages until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And it is not necessary to do so during the treatment or immediately after incision now, but you must elevate their head because of rapid fluid buildup.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 If an abscess comes, release the oil three days before incision, and apply soothing ointment to the affected area.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it is calmed, remove any dressing and place a bandage on the face to cover for one day, keeping in that darkened house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 Then gradually leave the darkened house little by little, and return to normal activities as you are able.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And believe that no interference should occur in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one day to us from Yrach came saying that in our land there were om almagda perciets causing water to flow, but I have never seen any here in our lands or read about them in ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And sometimes it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 These are the similarities to forms of elephants because those who do not know them see them this way.
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they truly are:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	The head of those from this same subtlety lies flat on three corners sharp.
de la char sor le neis	they p s, et w with l’s ount cite of arment:
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 At no time do they give birth or have various dislocations, from which some appear like scorpions stinging their limbs.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 and if there are such that they have sharp dislocations of fiery colors, and those with softness in the color of bones.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 In cases like these where there is softness and not sharp dislocations, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 and open his nostrils, and pour onion extract onto those with softness, and apply force to them.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 thus continue what you have started holding the tender tip of a subtle blade on one side until you know that dislocation is completely bone-like.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if there remains anything that cannot be handled, try operating on it with all subtle ointments lightly applied, so nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 And if there is an inflammation or abscess, treat it as necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if it is a malignant abscess, quickly cauterize until the pus dries and all wounds are closed, then pour oil or wine to cool and disinfect them.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If healers do not work, and moisture reaches the throat, ensure they are safe;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 And if moisture does not penetrate as it should, make sure there is no swelling in the bone above, where pus cannot come out for dressing.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then it is necessary to tie a piece of flaxen thread slightly thickened, and keep it clean with hands, ensuring space between each knot or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 And place the patient's head back through its neck as much as possible, and pull gently until it enters comfortably into the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And many times they do so with children at schools, and it is an easy task for those who want to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then hold the head coming through the neck with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and support one after another as we who are fil (children) do.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this as long as you know that they have contaminated the wound. Then guide the child, drain the blood, and wash their hair with Egyptian balm, and return it to its place as before in the neck.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do this for three days or more, until the anointments have consumed everything that remains of the wax.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 Then afterward apply a bandage for several days until it heals, and if drying remedies are needed, then use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 This is the form of the instrument used to purge by pouring in oils and remedies at its top.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it should be of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, as in a container, and this leads them similarly.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And if you see it, then make a closed vessel, and let the effluvia be plain to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 There should be a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	they p s, et w with l’s ount cite of arment:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Many times appears on the head of the nose a disease called "telul," and it grows and becomes large until it is visible upon looking.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And therefore, one must initially make an incision, then stitch it firmly, and subsequently place the fire cautery or hot medication on it.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if it is not operated upon while still small, one should take care to observe if it becomes hardened, of furious color, and with weakened sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 if not touched by iron, for it is an incurable boil, because whenever one operates upon it, great harm befalls the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 and if the boil is of soft touching, not furious color, and one sees that it can be entirely incised, relieve the patient from fear and perform the operation without hesitation, curing dry and constrictive things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut off and removed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Believes that when continuous supply comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it benefits little, even in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 Therefore, when this happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then bring together both edges of the wound into a seam, and then heal it until it is sound.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 And if the edges are torn apart on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring together both edges into a seam, bind them up, and powder with powdered blood of a dragon, and burn incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place over the powders a piece of emplaster of strong or other emplaster binding it with them, and let it heal through it; then treat with ointment until it is sound.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The manner of the suture is such that you assemble the pieces together.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or with needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitching.
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 Sometimes abscesses occur within the thickened vein ends, appearing like grains of pepper, and small and larger ones;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 Then it is necessary to return the vein ends, cut above each one, and grasp them with forceps and place them in separate parts.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 then put back the piece after the incision of blister bleeding until the vessel is sealed.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then he helps to stabilize it, and treats the area until dryness is achieved.
de la char des gencives	From the edge of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Often emerges under the gums that the ancients called "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 If it is necessary to support it with forceps, cut at its root, and let the pus or blood drain.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 then apply the lead acetate plaster, or other drying and constrictive powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 and if it returns after the incision, and often occurs, then re-drain on the second attempt, and cauterize;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 if it does not return after cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 and these are ways to manage the discharge for treatment.
des sordens	For ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Never gathered at the top of the teeth between the gums, scales that are unattractive and sharp;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 At times they are black and yellowish-green and wormy, as long as decay reaches the gums, and the teeth become foul.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 If it becomes necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your holy one, and remove any teeth or scraps that are found, until there is nothing left.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And do this with blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other afflictions, until they are healed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 And if you extract what is at the root, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 But if not, resume again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 Know that the teeth require various forms of treatments to heal, according to what the work shows, because the razors from which one removes teeth have different shapes than those found between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 And these forms and other similar things are with you arranged accordingly.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary when treating the tooth of pain that you delay the extraction as much as possible, for it should not be done hastily.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 because it is a matter so important up to that one has no excuse for the extraction.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is straining to urinate, it is necessary that you are certain about the condition of their teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Often the pain troubles the patient, and he thinks it is a healthy tooth, and pulls out the bad tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 And indeed, do not leave the pain at all because of this, as long as the evil persists, for we have already tried it with these healers.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 And when you are certain of the toothache, if it is necessary, scrape around the tooth completely and thoroughly in order to protect the gum on all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then move it with your fingers or delicate tweezers slowly and gradually until it is properly aligned, then firmly fix the tweezers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And place the head of the malady in your holy hands between your thumbs and index fingers so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these ointments and apply it inside from every side gently, then move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 And if the tooth is pierced or mangled, if necessary, fill it with thread gauze at the sites of the holes.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 And if carefully stretched with pincers, so it does not break while being pulled.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And one must work gently around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And make sure not to break it, and leave a part behind; causing greater pain from the root for the patient initially.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And be sure not to do as the ignorant surgeon does, who through their hastiness and boldness break the instrument every time, without applying what we have explained.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 but they bring about great disease through this condition to the roots that remain there or from breaking the instrument as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 and when the tooth is extracted, wash it thoroughly with wine or alcohol and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply the paste of antimony to the area.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 If this does not work, then proceed with caulterization.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The forms of the strangulations, where one cannot move the teeth first, have sharp points and large loops that do not overlap when pulled through the hole.
et ce sont les formes:	 and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they have large limbs that do not bend easily when grasped, and are made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold them securely.
de la racine des dens	From the roots of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root cannot be pulled through, it is necessary to place cotton or wool in butter for one or two days until the gums are softened, then insert the pincers called "algefri", making the head appear like a bird's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 and they should be made similar to files in shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	the le Mort; 1.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And it is long and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root comes out through this, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If not, use all instruments, through which forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use the instrument that has two prongs, thus is the form as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments placed in front on the density, and of this instrument which appears like large pincers, thus is the form as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And these tools are such that they may not break, and know there are many of the same kind.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 and likewise other instruments, which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 and the wise master is subtle in using his instrument by himself accordingly to his procedures and illnesses that show themselves, for there are some diseases where ancient teachers did not provide an instrument due to their variety, or if it breaks on the cart or other bones, seek the instruments I mentioned earlier and use gestures as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And let them be large and firmly held to grasp the bone without slipping but can hold and extract.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore it to its original position with appropriate medicines for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, bring all of this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the tooth appears not in accordance with natural form and is ugly, especially in maiden women, one must ascertain if the root is still present after the tooth, and it is neither in its proper place nor can be saved or filed down.
adonques lou raie;	 Then proceed with cutting.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 And if it is hardened along with the tooth, take this instrument of which there are images below, and it appears as though having a small beak, and made of iron well sharpened at its tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the wax is taken little by little over many days due to dental hardness, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that one can be filed down, then file in a manner consistent with its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is similar to the file from which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 And with a file the teeth are touched lightly, little by little over time, so that they do not move until they loosen.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 Then at the end it shall be smoothed without any roughness, and if his teeth are too sharp they will nick the tongue; thus one must file the sharp edges until they are even, so that he does not nick the tongue nor damage speech.
quant li dent lochent	When a tooth becomes loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the teeth are loose or have fallen out by impact or decay, and the patient cannot hold what they chew without it falling apart, and you have treated them with constricting medications, but that is not effective.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 if they require being bound by a thread of gold, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold does not move.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let the child's stitch not be too large or too small, according to the quantity of space between the bones.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you see the bones aligning correctly, take the thread and pass it twice between both healthy teeth, then place the needle among the affected teeth, until you reach another healthy tooth on the opposite side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then resume wrapping up to the part where you began, and gently yet firmly pull your hand backward until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And ensure the ligature is close to the base of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then cut the thread with pliers, tie them together, and place them so that they do not touch the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then let it lie so narrow as long as it can remain there, and if it dislocates again, or the children return, they must be strained with another bandage.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 If it remains and serves thus for its entire duration, and it is the shape of two bones and the alignment of two healthy joints, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when the tooth falls out, then reset it back in its place, freshly each time, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And let no one who is not wise and patient interfere, nor at any time make the shape of a wolf's tooth, but place it where it is missing, and strain it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for long durations.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	tions. I2 Confit.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 Never is this bandage which comes from under the tongue or its natural form found to be like that.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 Or by accident of a burn wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 And the procedures are such that you treat the mouth of the sick person, keeping their head in health, and lift their tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 Then treat the sick person's tongue, until it is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is a severe wound, apply an incision and sever the ligaments.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 And ensure that the incision is not made too wide, for the artery which lies beneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 And after you have done so, lift up a piece of pink silk or cold water cloth, then place it under the tongue with a linen tent.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And each night wash away any tartar from the patient's teeth so they cannot close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 If bleeding continues to occur, then apply a poultice of potassium iodide on it.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 And if the wound does not heal, then use a slow-burning caustic which is beneficial for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 Then pursue another treatment until it becomes healthy again.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 And if you see the wound is colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 And if it is approaching gangrene, and there is moisture present, then apply an unguent with onion extract, which softens the area gently, and release it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if the wound does not heal at your hands, apply potassium ipsenate until it becomes impervious, then return to your treatment as long as you have exhausted all means.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then lift it carefully and gently, and treat other injuries until it is healthy again.
des apostemes de la gorge	ix, liant it is sore, et cest la ore if fain the l'ariz ot dite, but themes: and then let a bone le telle ise the te pierre d’avise et sereaux to pain dites du temps. And sores, the ou noir; si est de eis seize the cures, et of liant, soignez it the lits with lontaint: or les pren till them es ail not ome le t’em.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Never do obstructions occur in the throat called "godarths," and they are properly referred to as two almonds; when treating them as we have explained in the section, if they are not healthy, be cautious.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If it is an abscess of mild pain and size with a pale color, do not treat them without iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not treat without iron either for the bleeding to heal.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 but leave it until it is dead, and then you will cut it out, or it may break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is of pale blue hue and the roots are subtle, prepare the instrument for cutting but first ensure that the abscesses rest and are soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun with their eyes closed and mouth open, and perform the procedure using your hands on the jawbone, pressing the tongue away from all instruments as described.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 and be made of silver or fine iron just like a razor's edge.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 You must press the tongue against all instruments and observe for abscesses, if found, take a needle and insert it in the wart while twisting and pulling slightly upwards as much as you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And train any thing with threads, then grip the instrument of it, which is its form, that seems like some force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 In all ways, the head is curved, one place to another, and it is very painful, made of iron or copper.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	Here's a la est est instrument, et les maintement, you can be all with it the chauquarge d'oftes. ici est to the pliant, and of, but so that the c the instrument, ou sewit is made ongne, just as coi de l’est, here, in a ce que tu pee, et thet ecointend with lances: for you may be any le pain est c.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And be sharp on one side, and nameless on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have clamped one of the almonds, then clamp the other in the same manner as before, and after the incision, rinse the patient's mouth with hot water, salt, and lemon juice, and if blood discharge occurs, rinse their mouth again with hot water or boiled pomeghrenate slices, or mugwort leaves until the wound is closed.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat until it becomes sound again;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And at no time does an abscess arise in the throat other than two large ones, then treat them as you would with these two large abscesses.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, which is to say one small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and the abscess was so tightly closed that it nearly choked her throat passage which was blocked, and she could not breathe or eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that there were two heads through its two openings on each side of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 So I acted immediately, and inserted one needle therein, then the wound was turned, resulting in a large portion of pus.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then reset it on the other side, by pulling the nose, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 After extracting the splinter from this abscess, and biting off part of it, did not result in much blood.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And thus was cleared the path of the throat for the woman, and now began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease tearing at that abscess for long times.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 And the abscesses reappeared again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, becoming quite large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Then I deceived it and performed a cautery within the throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	 Thus, he stayed without growing.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And from those parts I departed, and it was only God who did for him after me.
de l’uve	after a part of I the space healed with them as if, but did that is often. Et eyebrtee abscessing large I need to do him or not had it so became c which they should be treated by done and throat it was applied over again it back; s untainted, for them after let them long the pass I put then anoints. They were that with stab worm.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When they restore it to its place, and it is fled and long, then it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is not thick and round, then it is called an "eyeball".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it is cut as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the abscess wound has calmed down and is subtle, then one must excise it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And those that are round but gathered together and not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And if it is of blood or flesh-colored or black, then one must avoid making the incision there.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Therefore, when you see it as I have described in terms of its breadth and length, seat the patient facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument we previously recalled.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then insert the hook into the eyelet, and pull outward, and cut two incisions as I have described for removing the two tendons.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess beyond its natural boundary;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 because if you cover too much, it will hinder speech and language.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and after the incision, use what we have described for incising the two tendons, and heal as much as is severed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of being covered, it is necessary that you apply measures for the reassurance before covering them.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The method of the cautery should be acute gout.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument as described in our chapter on fire cautery, and moisten with clear hot water so that it is neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And for using this instrument, here is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And you have at the end of a spoon or cup place the medication, as with the handle of a ladle, and position the instrument all around the medication on the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 and let the patient lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medication, ensuring it does not go down to the throat.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 then hold your hand all around the medication and press it against the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see redness has subsided and the biting sensation from the medication is soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 and if you see any instruments, wrap them in cotton with the medication, and insert the instrument into the cotton up to its tip beneath the lid.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And often do this until the caulteries are perfect, then let it dry, and fall off after IV or V days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you need to repeat the caulteries of the ointment, do so again afterward, and wash around the wound with a cloth wrapped in butter, and cleanse what is around it.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And be dressed in cold water, and be treated with gargles until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This treatment is safer than the incision, not just the caulteries;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take expectorants and yarrow, hyssop, rue, chamomile, elecampane, and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of them into an earthenware pot, then set to boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And let the bone be firmly fixed with strong clay, and within the bandage have an instrument fitted according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And it be made of silver or copper, and one should insert the head into the mouth of the patient until they breathe out through the nose, until the eye is numb.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 and upon repeated occurrences, until the eye dries out, ensure that you do not apply heat at the onset of abscess inflammation, for many things can happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 and do not use this only when an abscess is hot.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this instrument is not present, take a nose and insert an eagle feather in it so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 For the cracked tooth does not much burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times there are bones or fish spines in the throat or other things.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 Therefore you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all your instrument, so that you may move the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And what does not appear and is resituated in the throat, it must be made to induce vomiting so that the meat may cook in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 Perhaps if you eject the thing through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge or a piece of cotton, or a lettuce root, or crust from dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 And lay it with the sponge filament and then transglutinate it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 And when it reaches its place, you shall remove it, and then bind tightly.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 And if it does not move as we have said, take the instrument of tongs in this manner:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And let the prongs be raised to the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and raise the head high.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And ensure you do not touch the epiglottis, as it could harm them or cause discomfort;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 And moves must it happen that the patient uses the instrument because it is moved or the thing is loose.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If the resetting occurs, then he pulls with all instruments equally until it becomes strong again.
de la sansue de la gorge	For dislocation of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 Medicine should never be neglected, as I have said in the section on treatments by medical remedies;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And if it does not work, then look in the patient's throat to the sun while pressing their tongue with the instrument I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see it, so treat all small canals or delicate pincers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that is not suitable, then take a boiled cat gall, put it in the patient's throat, and make frequent attempts to expel the hot gall with iron.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And give the patient water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then take full juger of cold water and work the mouth, causing it to swallow easily, and move at its hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And if soon after the remedy feels like water, let it flow.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not come out as we have said, gently blow the patient with asthma using an instrument mentioned in the smoke treatments for the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times, because she will linger longer than expected.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the method of smoke treatments is to take an iron vessel where there are coal fires present and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and from that opening be the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 then you pour the smoke treatment, and the patient places the vessel's top in their mouth, seals it shut so that no smoke escapes, but fills up to the lungs.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 and now the lungs will fill, and if it does not come out, repeat the smoke treatment many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 And sufferers experience thirst, and consume salty and sour things, and do not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 Then at some point it will be necessary for him to pass stool under this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the form of the instrument used to extract blood is, when it can be seen, similar to bent pincers for entering into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 and resembles the beak of an instrument, and it has the roughness of limestone, such that whatever it takes cannot slip away.
et vez ci la forme:	 and this is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The instrument used for treating sinuses; and it looks like has texture similar to surgical procedure as the beak of a surgeon's tool, thus:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 Many types of abscesses are, as recollection comes after one and another in this book, and they differ between puncturing and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And it is in two ways alike, one from its own nature itself, and because of moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for boils that occur within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 because an abscess at the top is different from one at the base, and an abscess in the thighs is different from those that occur in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 If with an abscess that should not be pierced, until the bowel is completely healed according to its course;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 and if of those that should be pierced when they are ripe, do not heal as is their course, like an abscess near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When abscesses occur near joints and are left to become ripe, by chance they may corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 Or the abscess is near a major limb, and if you delay the piercing until it has healed, it will harm the main limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 or it is near the foundation, if you pierce then not when it is fully healed.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 and it does not bode well to pierce an abscess when digestion is incomplete, especially one near the foundation, that it may rupture entirely, extend internally, and cause a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 And cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And it is necessary that you determine the time of the abscess's full formation, and when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and mild debates and sharpening of the abscess's head, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And it is necessary to keep the incision in place unless further moved from the abscess site, and wherever healed.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And the incision should be lengthy in accordance with the body's size, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, or arteries, and all other similar areas without swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that bulge, along with that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when abscesses are in their natural place, one must let the puncture remain until it is fully digested as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 If you pierce it before this wound, there is a spreading of poison in the body and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And sometimes harden the lips and his deep parts.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And for any abscesses that are pierced according to the size of his body, as needed by its members.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 And you must address small abscesses and punctures.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many ruptures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 and if at such abscesses where it is necessary to close the head and cover them;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 when they become hardened like leather and are numb, then it is done as with blisters:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 and if at such that are split into three corners, and as with those which you cover like the bellows of mire, as arrow wounds in the forearm.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if there are such places where one makes round cuts or other types of gashes resembling shears.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those who do not have a head, as if an abscess is superficially swollen, it is necessary that you pierce straight through.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 and when the abscess is large, with great swelling of flesh, you pierce it, but do not draw out all the pus at once, but one part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 then stuff the abscess until the next day, and thereafter drain nothing in particular.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 do this repeatedly gradually larger each time, until all the swelling subsides.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or women carrying, or young children, or old men who are feeble.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the abscess may occasionally burst with the release of pus, potentially causing death to the patient, and do not grieve over it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Then avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, open the wound, and check if the wound of the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 And if it's a neatly formed lump, try to treat it with linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 And if it's large abscesses, and there are many boils, then you must insert a tent in each one so that they grow against each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 And if you have cut into the abscess near the skin, and it has bled around, then you must fill it with old cotton or wool from linen cloth without moisture, and bind until after three days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the bone is set straight, and treated with ointment until it heals completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 If blood flow occurs at your work site, prepare cold and soothing water, and moistened cloths, and place them on the affected area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 And if the bleeding persists, administer care and treatment as mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is winter or the dislocation or abscess is very sensitive, then apply cloths soaked in warm wine and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 and if it is summer, and the dislocation or abscess is swollen, then apply cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and then remove the abscess and drainage, treating it as necessary until healed completely.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 And this is what must generally be known in treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 Then I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of pus-filled boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses come on the head, and they have treatments that are like pouches, similar to the udders of a sheep, there are many such cases.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are some that are greasy and such as hairs with moisture too.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And there are those that are hard and pus-like to touch, and there is no doubt as the arrow does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the tasks of cutting are such that you should try with every instrument called "intrusive," from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, they will go beyond its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape away everything in the hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave anything.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 Then dip a cotton ball into Egyptian ointment, if available.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 If not, in water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And those who are still dislocated will go back to their original position, as they were before.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And then the process repeats with the bandage, just like before, on the second day and so forth, until you are certain it does not remain dislocated again.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if an abscess persists in being filled, then proceed according to this method for a long time.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and apply your poultices generously, and scrape off all scabs, and put forth all your treatment methods in treating the area where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if an arrow is causing trouble, then do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat the abscess if it is pus-filled, and with thorns and cleansing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And on the swelling over a pus-filled abscess and the wet area, it is easier because they have less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if there are any of these abscesses or heads without moisture, and those old abscesses that I described earlier in a woman's head.
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found the abscess like a hard stone, sharp and bloody, which could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 But if it had been struck anywhere else, one would have just made a wound like that of a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses that arise or appear at the head, those that come from children and roots of ears, leave the opening there for as long as necessary, so the pus can escape.
et les cure si com il covient.	 and treat them as needed.
des scrophules	Scrofula is an illness caused by tuberculosis bacteria affecting the lymebones or surrounding lymph nodes, often presenting with swelling on the neck's side. It was commonly treated in medieval times using fire cauterization and other herbal remedies to draw out pus and promote healing.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times there are abscesses in the neck and behind the ears, and even in the armpits, and they never appear elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous and interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And each goiter is properly dense in its place, just like the head and abscesses we have mentioned;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 and there are many similarities to these goiters.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others which are malignant and refuse to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 in that one then you see with good position to touch, and is similar to the body's color, does not protrude from either side and is neither soft on the sides of the neck nor at the artery or duct, and it is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 If it is necessary to cut above, and peel each part, then stretch the skin so that there are no wrinkles, if needed, as we have said in head sores.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 and pull gently at intervals, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, nor any small tendons that may come forth; so that hands do not slip, and don't see too far ahead, so as not to cut anything you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cut a vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then place lime-iron slag in the wound, or any powders that stop bleeding, and tie up the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 and let it rest until the swelling is calmed and the wound has softened, then begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the wound is stitched up, return to your work until it is completed.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then you should apply your special skill if there remain small cysts; cleanse and disinfect them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if the vein at the root of the cyst is large, do not cleanse that cyst in its roots, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then apply to the wound a piece of fine cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you drain the entire cyst, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and close them up, so that there is no excess due to its size.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And if it is necessary, you must drain the root of it and remove pus, and close as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 Those cysts causing excess, puncture them where they begin to thrive.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 And it is pierced thus as previously mentioned, depending on the situation, then you should dress wounds with ointment and similar things, if they become contaminated from decay.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is thoroughly cleaned, apply an ointment of fresh char, until it heals completely.
de squinance	And if you to oil any residue of excessive as weeping; and ointment so what remains like that they remove with.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients spoke and wrote about throat surgery;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 but I have never seen such a procedure performed in our land, and it is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those with quinsy, it is necessary to remove the incision in the throat known as "epiglottis";
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 and this is not done with it because all the veins and the main blood vessels are present in those with abscesses burning hotly in the mouth, or throat, or two arms;
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the organ, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 Then indeed, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should split it from behind three circles or four into a small slit across, between two circles or by the amount of the slit on its side, not in the throat.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 and such eyes if they are affected by the section of the epiglottis that there is no distress, and the vessels are long enough to see them clearly.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is fearful, it is fitting that he stretch the skin of the neck to its full extent, then split the flesh as much as it stretches to the veins.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 and remove the blood vessels, if you see nothing, then cut into the flesh as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 And it is shown by the severed throat of a feline that jumped through being broken at the neck, and due to loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And leaves an open wound exposed for some time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the hour has passed that there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound at the back, and suture it completely along the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer remedies that generate warmth, until he is well again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	by:
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Then you cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and thus is kept from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 And they command the patient to keep the open wound until the illness's malady is gone, which takes 3 or 4 days. Then they order it to be stitched up and cleaned out, once it has healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw a maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And I went to try to cure her, but found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it; and I saw that she had not bled from her veins or any other passage except through her throat, and the bleeding was strong from the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hurried, stitched the wound, and treated it until she was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 and there was no harm to the maiden except for her being hoarse in voice, and afterwards returned to her usual state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 Therefore I say that in treating the epiglottis there is no need for fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses the color of jet, and occur mostly in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 There are two methods as follows:
naturez, et accidens;	 natured, and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 or natural does not have a remedy.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And such occurrences are in two ways, one resembling fatigue to us, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 And there may be fear, and it does not require working on large wounds except in that which is small, and try and search for everything related to it.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 If you find it as we have found fatigue, and not directed to any vein, then bandage like we bandage ours, and treat the area completely, if there is a spot.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And search thoroughly, and heal as it should be, until perfectly healthy again.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 Many ways we have, of which I will tell all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 And here one must say all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that dislocation is heat and fever-ridden, as long as the boiling has not ceased, and the decay is complete.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 Then rests the fever and warmth.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With ours there is no warmth or fever and pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sack and follows the color of the body, beginning as a jet, and becoming thickened.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And it resembles in its appearance, either fatty or moist substance, with colors as I have described in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When attending to the patient's wound, first examine and question with all the instrument called "intermitted," according to its form or procedure which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the manner of inquiring into boils among us is that you grasp or find more moisture there than in the boil, and turn your fingers occasionally, until you know that the pus has pierced the skin, then according to the size of the boil.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then extract the interosseous, and take care so it does not bleed.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If moisture runs through the vein, if it has any color as I have said of other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And after extracting the interosseous vein, if no moisture comes out, assume it is fatty, then incise in a cross pattern, and take pinchers to lightly scrape from each side, and cover the coat where it lies with a clean dressing.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot cleanse it thoroughly, then cut into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 Because if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if any remains and it does not hurt him, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, tighten the wound, and put on soothing substances for other remedies until it is healthy.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If it is severe, then cut the edges of the wound, and treat as if there were a festering sore.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the boil appears contrary or other, apply vinegar and leave it on for two or three days until the wound heals, and allow rest to relieve blood congestion.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to the previously mentioned treatment that was delayed in use.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Behold these forms of intruding sores, and there are three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	 large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And there are three types that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are again three kinds;
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small to address abscesses of a fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 These are like the needles used in sorcery, made of brass, iron, or silver, and turning ones made of yellow color are more effective, and they are especially tried for finding haemorrhoids from a fistula.
et sont de III manieres:	 There are three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, and small, according to the size of their openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of tumors are most similar to what you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and if there are tumors that have hemorrhoids of three kinds as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and if there are tumors with three types of hemorrhoids, just like the sizes.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 and if there are tumors that have two kinds of hemorrhoids, or only one kind, they too come in three sizes.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 And all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The primary tools used for these purposes are sharp ones, and among them there are those that do not cut at all but only scrape the skin, hence one does not sever the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 and among these instruments are those used to remove scabs, such that the patient does not feel them during the incision of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	 And there are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 And they are used only where the flesh is toughened, such as legs, arms, cheeks, and elbows, and other similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 And never is any other small instrument used, resembling the scrapers of lancet wounds, according to this form, which causes bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And at no time is one placed in such a way that it touches the veins for copulation, and arteries, and again according to this great method:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Never do the breasts of any men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 and remain ugly and swolled, and whoever wishes to heal them should do so according to the following form of this line... until b: g
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 then scrape the fat, and apply medicinal pitch to the wound, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, until it is cleaned.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 and the breast falls forward, and becomes soft due to its size like in women, making it into two rib-like folds above, with two similar splits.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 to the point where one is held against the other at the end of each, so that the larger contains the smaller according to this form... from line b: up to line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, then treat as we have mentioned with stitching and powders, and everything necessary for healing until it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 And if it is not clean, or the incision has not fully healed because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a pliable cotton ball soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 and leave it to heal until all remaining tissue and fat are gone, then cleanse it thoroughly until it is healthy again.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses on the elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And often it is found in places or any swelling of, and are from them that the oment wherein lest.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowel that is in an abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles like scrofula, treat it as we have described for the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound fills with bowels, prepare a fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the procedure of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the vein is exposed and the skin above it swells, thus there are often abscesses occurring multiple times, and similarly occurs an outbreak of gouty joints and ulcers.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if it is discovered at this stage for an artery, then there are large abscesses near.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you feel it in your shoulders, you sense straining severely;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And if it is for the vein, then there are visible signs of insufficiency appearing.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 It is foolish to treat this abscess, and especially when it arises from joints and nerves and neck and involves many others, making it very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore one must avoid the iron treatment, and for those at risk of head injury it is also avoided, as well as in cases where artery pressure occurs above long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 Then work the groin glands, and carefully remove the blood vessels from the sinews until they are exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then insert a needle on one side and pierce until the opposite rib, and tie off the artery with a double thread for two fingers, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are behind the ears.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Then pinpoint the joint which is between the two threads of a trocar until no blood flows out from it, and then open the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 Then perform the suturing as required by the wound, while ensuring that the ligature bites.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply appropriate ointment for this matter until it is cleaned.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And if the abscess is large in size for the vein, it is necessary to treat your hand as you would the entire skin of the abscess with an ointment, then insert a needle on one side that you hold in your hand and pierce until the opposite rib, and tie off with a double thread.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 Then treat the abscess as I have told you, or if it lies between one part of the two shoulders.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 And if you doubt that the threads are not all gone, then it pushes another needle through all the threads from underneath the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and pulls the threads in four directions.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 Then excise the abscess until no excess tissue remains, then cut away any remaining pus and leave what is attached.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply a compress of wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and salves until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come from the artery and vein; they form in the nerves when struck or due to excessive strain, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 And this occurs more often in shoulders and arms with all the joints, and it is severe abscesses, and its appearance resembles that of the body, causing pain in various ways.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when it is strongly held back, the patient feels great pain, and it is not throughout the whole body, but from below the head.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 And he moves badly all over, and cannot go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and those who are in the joints do not need to be bound with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 there may well be spasms;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 and those who have it at the head or forehead cause swelling in the temple area.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is small, then treat it with tweezeboots and bandage at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is large, then drain it with a hook, scrape away the dead tissue, then stitch up the wound and dress it until healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Heavy hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 Never occurs in wombs or elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its appearance, and the roots are subtle, but the stems are thick.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 And there are both small and very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 I have seen patients with two wombs that appeared more like fungi than anything else, without any difference; they were white, had fine roots, and were cracked, containing moisture within.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I weighed them and found the first to be eighteen ounces, and the other six pounds, and upon incision one observes if the patient is moist, with the arterial color being pale and wet and of a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If the cloth at the thigh is wide, and have the fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For in cutting often comes great blood loss, and if it does not stop, then quickly apply the caustic.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 And if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread, bind it tightly as we have said, and leave for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 And then the binding continues, do not stop tightening the linen thread until it heals the wound, and make sure to irritate by it.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 And if the roots are large and you fear for the abdomen, but adequately cover most of it with a cup then cauterize so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cover the torn flesh which is of reddish color, poor sensation, and lacking movement.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an advanced syphilis, and I will treat the chancroid hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth jaw is injured
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the appearance of gangrene comes from a wound or incision infection, and it is on the belly with none elsewhere as occurs in other regions, where blood flows from veins or arteries depending on what is seen before, or swelling.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 And if it is from the infection of the gum and by the exit of pus, then its appearance is similar to that of normal skin color, feels like a minor thing with little pain, and has various issues arising from it.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed at its limits, it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance it may be swollen, and greatly enlarges the entrance to the bath and for vigorous work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and appears normal when you press it with your hand, do not restrict movement.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it is for blood, when large and hard abscesses are opened by these signs, they grow and become embedded in accordance with the quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is for inflammation, when tender upon touching, and the appearance of the wound seems to be related to arterial blood or vein or inflamm ization.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to leave the wound open for healing.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there may be doubt and fear, as I have described in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is of intestines or bowels, then you command the patient to stretch out his legs and extend them straight, then encircle him entirely with a belt.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 then command him to lie supine between your hands, then go around the region that you have bound with all of the bandages, and extend most of the abscess above over the entire large swelling.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then encircle it with a strong thread or cord made of sturdy silk, ensuring the knot is secure.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then work on extending a portion of the abscess over the joint, and insert your instrument, piercing it into the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you find the joint captured, detach it, and push the intestine back through to its original position in the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if there is a boil, grasp it with forceps, and remove any excess material.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if the artery is in an unfavorable position or bleeding profusely, then return to your work and take two needles. Bore through them with a threaded cord and place the two needles around where you have previously made a cross incision for piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then strain the abscess into four layers beneath the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the place rest until it heals, and extract the dead tissue by yourself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 Then you shall bind it if it is thin and suitable, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the place as necessary, and close the wound.
dou chancre	On the ulceration
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in its classification are the types of cancer, and how it should be worked with medicine, and how to drain a wound.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And say the cancer originates in the bone marrow, and great caution is required for treatment, and the ancients said that when cancers are located where they can be removed like a tumor on the breast or thighs, and it should be entirely excised at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when it is large and old, you must not approach it, for I have never been able to cure any.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 nor has anyone ever healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the procedure, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said, is to remove all black pus from the patient.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 then the physician should drain if there is visible engorgement, and prepare the patient properly for the procedure.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 then pour in thy warts or sores, and cut away all hair around them, and bone fragments from all sides, leaving nothing behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 and allow the blood to clot completely, pressing well with your hand or any material, and if blood flow resumes contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until it is sealed.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then provide other treatment until he is healthy again.
de ydropisie	And for dropsy, which means edema due to fluid retention in the body, causing swelling: apply a concoction of rosen with roses and ointment and pour on l'estuin, et les eaux; puis giete li detergens le morsel de l'eau-lui.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 Then we have discussed in the division similarities to dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and those treated with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	 If it only oozes;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 And one should not be touched by iron in these two resemblances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 That is to say, tympanitis and hyposarca, for it is a deadly thing. - Tympanitis refers to inflammation of the eardrum (tympanic membrane), while hyposarca might be referring to
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 Therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "oozing" with medicines and the treatment does not help, check if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropseris, such as constipation and similar things. - Here, it's discussing how to approach a case that initially presents like dropsy (a condition characterized by an accumulation of fluid in tissues) but doesn't respond to standard treatments for the illness. The doctor is advised to consider other diseases or conditions such as constipation and so on, which might be contributing to the patient's symptoms.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 And if you see the patient with strong vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and they are not too young or too old, then so should you work in this manner:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Lift the patient upright with your hands, and let the minister press on the belly from below pushing the water to the lowest part of the pelvis; then take the sphincter muscle in accordance with this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And take sharp instruments of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 At its tip, and always ensure that it does not extend so far as to reach the intestines when inserted. Do not make a hole:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 Then check if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines;
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 If necessary, you must cut above the elbow three fingers straight from below along the wrist.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 And if there is dropsy due to a disease of the liver, then make the incision on the left side of the elbow three fingers wide.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 And if it is due to scabies, then make the incision on the right side, and you must ensure that the patient lies with their back flat so that excess fluids do not flow into the weakened area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Then puncture the entire surface with an instrument, and push in the probe, and lift your hand to clear all the tissue between the skin and the fascia as when scraping off the quantity of a fingernail or slightly more.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then pierce the fascia until you reach the level of eight tissues, and that is the source of water, then the vein, and insert this instrument whose form follows:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 It resembles a fine silver chain, made of copper or bronze, and is in the part below the small hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 And it has an edge from one side, with a small hole.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 And it has another edge on the other side, and at the opposite end.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is the head cut so as to resemble a pen, and it has the shape of the incision that scribes carve their pens.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 at its top is the handle, so when strain occurs, it pushes up against the instrument immediately.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 then empty the middle or the third part, because if you remove more than necessary during that hour, perhaps the patient may die due to the exhaustion of their spirit from the weapon's influence, where they sweat excessively, or near death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 However, according to the quantity of its virtue, and depending on what the disposition of virtue in the patient means, and his hair.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 Then use the instrument and retain water, which is held in place by a plug that stops the hole mentioned above, as I have spoken, piercing it according to this method.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 Then use the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering as such, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do this every other day and be careful not to overdo it so that no more than a little bit of water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then apply remedies like burial or hot sand, and through a lot of sweating or bathing in the sun, and with drinks.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the medical treatment with drying medications until it is healed, and caustication on the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	From the impotence of the male member
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 No child is ever born without a foreskin on their penis, or if the foreskin is small, or not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary that he must be circumcised very quickly, following this particular method with great subtlety:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 Then insert a fine bone probe into the wound, and close it up so that after three to four days, once it begins to produce urine, ensure it is securely closed, allowing for urination.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And perhaps there is no need, as the urine that comes forth does not leave it sealed shut.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If the closure is small, it is a remedy for the clot of blood as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not have the catheter in place are tied up because none can give birth at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they elevate their penis.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And they cannot heal it because the material cannot reach up to the bone, and it is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 And the method of treatment is such that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the rod and cap as round as a pen's body, so that the thread can be spun easily, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And beware of the bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, use the string for sewing blood vessels, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Of pus from the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Many times these abscesses come in the rod, and it appears as a loathsome ulcer.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And within them there are both harmful and harmless conditions;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 If it is necessary to pluck them at the root subtly, and cleanse and purify all of them, then place Egyptian cotton wool soaked in oil.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the fine oil ointment until it is sufficient.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the abscess is malignant, of foul color and draining pus, it is necessary that you apply a fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 Once you have cleansed them, and if the cloth is soaked in oil with part of it sticking to the hairs inside, some embedded deep within the roots and others dangling loose, then it must be that you remove the piece embedded first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it comes off completely, if the remaining portion also loosens.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 For when you cleanse it together, if the hairs are not securely pulled out, otherwise there will be bleeding in the region of the pubic area and darkness and decay may occur there.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to treat all that is black and corrupted, first place it on a plaster of honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranate fruits and dates, then apply other remedies until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 If bleeding continues to occur, then apply the lunar cautery according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery is useful for two purposes in combination:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 It is to know, in the flow of blood and infection:
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 And if the head of the penis is corrupted and receded, it is necessary to insert or guide a tube in the penis with honey and urine for the patient.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 And when the hair is loose on the head of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised or due to injury or abscess, it is necessary then that you scrape it with a sharp instrument until the shaft is released and freed from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then you should scrape at the fistula with an iron spatula, not too deeply into the head of the penis and hair.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then carefully separate them, and place a fine cloth of flax soaked in cold water between them, ensuring it is not too tightly bound.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not an ongoing disjunction like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 However, if we do this work of our own accord, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best possible work, and the easiest to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice childhood circumcision, for it is not done in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 Because I have observed most masters and healers performing circumcision in the dawning light, at times of force, and on any occasion.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 If it were the heart because there are two layers, and perhaps you could suture that above and leave it below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 And he regains his speech, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning which is with vinegar is not certain that the point of the limb.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 and in cleaning the wound with vinegar perhaps slips out the iron, and they rot, and many times it arises this way so there is no need for cleaning and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the immobilization made by force throughout the entire limb, I have found from experimentation that it is beneficial, as the forces cut equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 For when you press your hand, cut evenly with all fingers;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but that the thread is well tightened around the leather;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not tie him but just bind the thread around the rod only, and then release it in all ways as much as you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 Then place it between your hands straight away, and restore the strength of your arms or from under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any straining.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then place your hand on the rod and blow or kiss upon it, and drag in upward until the head of the rod is aligned.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then cleanse it well from any impurities that have accumulated therein, then tie the joint with a double thread, then bind below to above.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 and fasten it with two loops through the second ligature to the pocket and its indicator, and cover between the two threads, then gently raise the head from compression and guide the rod back.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 then let some blood drain slowly and slowly, for it is a minor hemorrhage.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And apply powder on and above the powder, a poultice made by gluing a spoonful of egg yolk cooked in hot rose water, boiled with good rosemary oil, and let it remain until the following day, curing further until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The use of strengthening methods for this medication is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 Both shoulders should be kept strong and sharp, and the arms equally well-developed.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The mistake in medication is when blood flows out during the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 Therefore, you should extend it to your thumb, so that his eye creates an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And do this evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your thumb, then use tweezamoins the tool, and afterwards the poultice;
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if they persist for three days, and that which is under the sinew becomes swollen, let it be left until the inflammation of the abscess has subsided, and lightly scrape.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 And if you touch it as I instructed, but be cautious of the sinew area, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Therefore heal sudden wounds of powdery substances as we have instructed to treat with powders, and if you apply too much force when opening the skin, and it goes beyond that, it will not cause harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Heal accordingly, as we have said, until it is sound.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is due to the compression of stones, or frozen blood, or arrows, or nettles, or similar things as we have said in that section.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that there is retention due to a stone in the urethra or bladder neck, it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 And they are placed with their heads on the back, and the patient extends his belly from above the lower back, and he is held upright as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 And then you constrict the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine is discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with an instrument called "catheter", which is of this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And they are of finely spun silver, light as a bird's feathers;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 and the needle is one and a half palm in length, and it is fine at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the method for urine issues is that you take a double thread and attach to it some wool or cotton at the tip, then insert this into the syringe with both threads.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 and cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and almond meal, and have the patient sit on a stool, and apply oil soaked in olive oil and water to their bladder and penis.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then gently insert the catheter into the penis, up to the base of the penis, then wrap the penis above towards the scrotum.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it reaching the empty sac, but this is not done in this order because the direction in which it flows is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then extend the thread through all the hairs little by little, and urine follows the thread, then pull it out again, and let the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And begin with the catheter as long as the bladaturd is emptied, and relieve the patient's discomfort.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction is present therein, and you see to distill waters and medicines, make use of the entire instrument called "clyster," which is thus formed:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and if at any orifice:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 On one hand, and on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And the roots from which the medicinal paste is such that it well fills the member without addition, and if one can draw out the moisture, and do so as needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you see to apply your medicines in the bladder, place the scorching stick where there is moisture, and draw out what can be drawn.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 If you draw out the moisture with the burning stick, and then strongly reshape it as possible.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 If there is entry of moisture there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is the form of the subtle cleansing for which we cleanse the bladder:
si est ci:	 If it occurs thusly:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 and from under the neck where the ligaments tear;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture inside that you wish to use for an enema on the bladder, then tie it between the two nipples with a strong double thread, and heat the moisture over fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 then insert the head into the enema, and press your hand against the bladaderly moisture as soon as it reaches the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly through.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then blow a strong thread through these perforations, then form the circle as you would with a peg and hole, and fill inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and bind it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do so as you did with the bladder, pressing until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have already described in this section methods of stone removal and extracting arrows collectively with remedies;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 And I have explained the difference between stones inward of rain and all other signs, and where stone you must work by cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 And in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 And I will tell it openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that stones lodged within the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign that water springs from the bladard like to a watery subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And he has bare skin, and grieves the patient greatly with his rod, and strikes him many times, then immobilizes.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 and it is part of these blows that shakes the foundation;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 and it is lightly healing for children up to four years old, but very severe in the elderly, and moderate for those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 and it is a lighter treatment for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to expel all feces from within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For sometimes it may obstruct the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the feet and stand them up, bending backwards so that the stone descends to the front of the bladwock, without any sign of blood coming out from the back.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then make them sit between your hands spread apart, with their hands behind their thighs, so that the bladder slopes downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then grasp and touch within; 
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel the stone in the space, quickly cut near the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not pass with the probe at all, grease your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child or an adult.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 and place it at its base, then press on the stone, and when you feel it in your finger, amputate near the bladder neck.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 then press with your finger, and remove the residual part where you see cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And instruct the minister to press the bladres with his hand, and command him to extend upwards with his right hand the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the loins at the part where you make the cut.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then apply the splinting bandage so this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And make it between those who are between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but to the left of the navel.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 And it should be straight above the stone, and your hands should touch either its top or base, and extend the rope as wide as needed if broad, and dense within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 In case you press the hand that is either on top or at the base, so it moves without effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 And know if there are any pieces of stone or edges and borders:
si est griés a issir;	 If they are stuck in trying to remove them;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And if there is any part that resembles a slit, round, and whose removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 When you encounter joints with edges and margins, make the incision larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 And if it does not yield, then you must use forceps similar to a file on the head, to extract the stone so that it doesn't escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 or you insert an instrument with a subtle hooked end underneath;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 and if you cannot achieve it this way, slightly widen the opening, and if the stone is thickened, then extract with vinegar.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 and if there are multiple stones, first extract the largest from the bladder neck, then remove it with your fingers, and afterwards crush it, and do the same for any smaller ones that remain.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, one must soften it, causing a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 For two things occur in patients:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 When he dies or the urine flows again through the part where the flesh cannot join.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 Nonetheless, strive to drain with a syringe or debridement using pincers until you have treated it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 And once you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandages, and place moistened cloths soaked in oil and wine, or oil and pink and cold water to cool the hot sore.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 Then wrap the patient's neck with bandages without untying them until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you reset it, raise the area well with oil and water, then treat with the ointment diafiniticum and basilicon until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And if the sore is present in the wound and tissue deterioration occurs, with blood clotting in the bladder causing it to be unable to pass urine as seen by a lack of stream.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Therefore bend your elbow into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, then blisters and pus will form.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then lift the wound from water and filth and wind, and treat it in all ways you know of until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary that for all wounds you treat, bind him with two leg wraps and apply the ointments on site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 And if the stone is small and it comes from the penis and protrudes out, and he cannot urinate.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If you treat as I say hereafter, do the procedure many times, ensuring to unwind the scrotum with this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have also experienced this thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron bar in the following shape and make it at three sharp points like stakes:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take a thread around the shaft below the head so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 Then insert the probe gently into the shaft until it reaches the head.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 And turn the probe towards your hand in the head slowly and slowly, as you can pierce through to the other side of the stone.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 The urine will come out soon, then press your hand on what remains lodged in the head within the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 If it is broken quickly and comes out with the urine, and the patient is relieved.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 And if you cannot do it for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the head and another above, then break the shaft at the place between the two threads, extract it forcefully, loosen the ligatures, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat until it becomes healthy again.
de la piere des femmes	From the stones of women (referring to uterine stones or fibroids)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 Occasionally a stone may be found in women, and if it occurs once, then the treatment is serious, and there are three things to avoid.
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 One is that perhaps the woman might be a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 and the second is that one cannot find a wise woman who knows how to undress in front of strangers, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a knowledgeable woman in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's body is more embedded than in men, so it requires deeper cutting, and there is much fear involved. And if necessary, one must find a very knowledgeable midwife, and carefully seek her out, and if you do not find such, then no matter how chaste she may be, she must have subtle skills;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And this presents a skilled hand in women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and he commands that she performs what you command regarding the stone examination.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin.
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 Then it is necessary to apply a bandage or foundation and seek the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And if it bleeds, then bind it below the bandage and instruct that they apply a new bandage or hold it with their left hand over the swollen vein, wanting to press it.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If it bleeds, then they should move it gradually from the entrance of the vein to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 then push against the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle part where it is protruding, and feel for the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 and do not move his finger over or under the stone, and be sure to grasp at the first small part.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 Then insert the staff into the waist; if you feel the stone within, believe in the wound so that the stone may be removed forcefully, and know that there are many ways to deal with stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 This is known: small and large and sharp and smooth, elongated and round, and that have veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you examine similar cases to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the stone does not yield, then apply a poultice of white lead powder, and hold it there until the stone is expelled.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your work, until the stone is loose, and have the remedies I told you about for stone extraction at home to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if the stone does not yield, and it is from an artery that has burst, then apply powder on the site and wrap tightly with bandages and ties, and do not repeat this method again, and let the stone pass without traction unless by chance the patient faints.
puis cure la plaie.	 Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb restored, return to your work until the bone is strong.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Next, pus is nothing but a gathering of moisture or scabs, which are under the skin near the joints, contained in the blister.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and is called "scab," and it is never properly within the skin of the blister, if one thinks it is something else.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 and this is the leather-like tissue between the scabs that we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 And this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this pus is due to weakness in the joints, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And at no time if it comes from striking upon the joints, and this moisture is of many kinds:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or its color wanes to jaundice, or it lacks redness, or turns black, or becomes watery white, and this occurs more frequently.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is or becomes white as we have mentioned, then the abscesses reopen, they do not remain long like an egg's shape, and do not pierce the joints because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if it has moisture in its own tissue, then the abscesses reopen with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if there is moisture between the skin of the elbows and the shiny saddle bone, it feels quite well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, if it spreads over all the surrounding area, that is why there are marks beforehand.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we cauterize with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be healthy according to their ability and fullness of body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 Then you heat on his back, upon something slightly raised, and place a lot of linens under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 Then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit to your right, and extend the rod towards one of the two ribs below the elbow joint.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 Then take the spatula and cut the skin of the elbangs along their length up to the wrist, and make your incision straight while turning the skin towards the shiny saddle bone, and peel it delicately as far as possible.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then pierce the sack full of water through its wide opening, and extract all the water, and then apply linen bandages, and elevate the sack.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 and do not touch the edge of the wound, but only the sack itself;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 cut very finely along its edges, such that if you do not cut it neatly and cleanly, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 and if the egg springs forth from your work, then reset the limb in its place when you have completed the task with the sack.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then sew together the two edges of the wound securely, then treat it as you would other injuries until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if you find the egg to be spoiled by another disease, it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are swollen, fearing bleeding.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then cut away any excess sinew, remove the bone splinter, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if an artery is split into two parts together, ensure that they are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 Cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then stop the bleeding, and place a cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And apply another cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it, place cloths over the two joints, then cover with doubled sheets, and bind everything as described by this method.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take two more sheets and place them with shredded cloth as shown here, sewn together at the waistband, and one sheet should be pulled up to the back from the foundation, while the other is placed on the part near the wrist.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And the other two heads above the shoulders, and it is fully secured within the loop of the shirt.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 And this method of cautery is akin to iron bandaging in size and type, with the use of a delicate knife-like cauterizer, covering the leather straps, ensuring they are sufficiently heated as we have described, so that the white sap which contains water is revealed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 If you take the cautery in this manner and pierce that sap with thorns, and scrape off using this hot delicate cauterizer.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And scrape it in all ways you can, until everything is scraped off;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 And you must believe this work to be more healing;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 and with caution avoiding blood loss, and ensuring the actions of cutting are done correctly.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 and if anything opposes you, or an abscess appears or blood loss occurs or something else happens, then treat what is against you according to what has been previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this treatment due to its severity, then prepare a perforation as I have instructed you, ensuring that you are well-assured by the meanings we have mentioned that rehydration is appropriate, so make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 then puncture the abscess at the part above all of the swelling, and insert the perforation through the full length of the muscle.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the canals be wide enough so that all water flows strongly.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then place cotton at the wound, and bind it, allowing for the remaining water to drain out, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And if the gauze bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's opening, then it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument used for draining fluids as previously described.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And widen the wound and ensure that water returns, being reassembled after six months or more; when it is restored as before, then the patient will recover their strength over time.
de l’aposteme des coions	s; If you give me. Est acpleez:Cole tad that la crot et les ben :l's (prie 1.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Remember that in this branch's treatment there are various causes for fear among patients, which is why I believe it is best to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I will tell you about the work and appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 I say that many abscesses come in various parts of the body, especially in the joints.
et c’est par mout de cas.	 and this happens quite often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 It means that it is due to an excess of sourness and chills, which spreads to the joints or by impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body part.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 and it does not cause pain, but is a severe abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 and sometimes it is frightening and sharp pains, with an unusual color, never coming from our arteries or vein inflammation.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is due to us (the patient), it is known by the heat of the abscess when you press with your thumbs.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And it does not matter if you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 The one who is affected by vein inflammation can be recognized by its propensity to swelling with the touch of bones, and it may well form a lump on this appearance or others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 and is that you cut the outer skin, then elevate it upward, and treat with white saffron paste, and remove all of the sinew from around the bone.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the bone is already settled with these aforementioned methods, then it should be treated and skinned accordingly.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if there is inflammation in the bone or within the joints, it should be done that you release all of them completely and roundly skin them.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of a stone is there, you must completely cover it and extract the calculus as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are finished, dress the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other salves until it is well again.
de l’aposteme des coions	s; If you give me. Est acpleez:Cole tad that la crot et les ben :l's (prie 1.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a blister, with the softening of the joints, and the patient moves quickly when it goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the treatment for this disease is as dreadful as before, and still we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 It is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory for joints under their knees, encompassing all the vessels that are near the thigh with a bandage, and lengthen them straight.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 then cut along the sharp spatulum at the place where vessels are visible, and then scrape from each side, as we have described in the extraction of arteries that are in the temple.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 Then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein appeared, then securely fasten to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 Then cover with a dressing straight away, according to the size of the body, and treat the corrupted sores.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then heal the wound as with other bandages, ensuring that no ties are too tight to allow movement of either side.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 Because nothing bad comes from it, and if the veins come out everywhere, then one must loosen all ties.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 If the bone loses its movement due to the tying of the strings and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the treatment for scrofula
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The remedies for this injury are through the incision that occurs or suppuration, or extension under the belly in the arm area, causing the intestines to protrude into one of the sides.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 This treatment involves either of two approaches, due to stretching or extension of it, they come from various reasons:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 either from impact, jumping, shouting, lifting heavy loads, and similar causes;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 And the signs when it's from stretching of the sacroiliac joint appear gradually and persistently over long periods, and do not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And boils are equal up to the chin because the sacroiliac joint presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of division due to a boil, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse appearances appear from near the skin and it's for the exit of the intestines and the body affected by the boil.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	At no time do they tie the intestines with cords, and are kept thus; it causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron that cause fear, one must take care to remove them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to cleanse their intestines by hand in the wound if they can insert it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 Then either soak his neck between your hands and lift the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 Then they extend the head above, and cut all the skin of the elongated veins.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then insert into the ribs of the waist hooked ones according to what you need to open the wound, and they are such that I can be pulled out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then scrape off the sore that is from under the skin of the veins, as long as the white sore is completely uncovered on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then insert your finger into what is behind the vein, between the white sore which is from under the skin of the thigh, and between the second sore, and remove that which is behind the thigh, and between the second sore.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move the head of the veins with your right hand and extend the white sore up to your left hand, and lift the thigh towards all the sores towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 And command the minister to extend the mouth upwards, and cut out what is behind the joint.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 And if there are any intestines twisted or fistulas covered with white scars, and if you find anything such, cut it from the abdomen outwards.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle or one with thick thread made of several strands, and tie it in the back part where the fistula is, which is after the skin of the calf muscles.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the waist, then cut the veins that appear with threads, as long as there are four strands.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape and secure the fistula, which we have said is after the skin of the calf muscles, with a strong ligature made of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then encircle the heads of the children and divide them into two parts so that no creatures that nurse them can enter inside, unless an abscess occurs.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 And place the suture according to the first suture length of two fingers, and after these two sutures leave a swelling that is below from the edge of the joint's corner one thumb size.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 And afterwards according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut into the part that is below the joint's skin, until it reaches the cartilage and bone, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then prepare soft linen with oil, and apply to wounds, and establish the suture that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to concern for blood flow disruption.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 This often happens, leaving the bandage on until it dries out by itself.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 And if there is a delay in healing, apply warm water and place as we have instructed, until it dries out.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said it is made like fish bones that are joined with glue, in such a way that you bind the vessels, gently tearing above lightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 Then wrap it around me, and treat the abscess of what is working there until the vessels dry out.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And you will heal as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Never does a fracture occur without it being mentioned as we have said, and exposing the eyes.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And none of the intestines as clots are shed, and if they do, it is little, and heals all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 And also if it lingers too long in this area, the wound or abscess grows until the intestines are shed.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 And this happens by the extension of the abscess that is in the area, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and enlarges the eyes and exposes.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And the treatment is thus with fire, as we have previously stated;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 Never is it treated by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 And he who suffers should lie on his back between the hands, then remove the swollen bone fragment with a width according to the amount of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 And then extract the sinew that is below the skin which it follows, and then take hold of the head and place it back onto its apparent socket in the sinew.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 and press at the front of the belly, then cut two holes visible in the sinew near the head of the shaft, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 then extract the head of the shaft, and do not cut the sinew or stretch the ulna or any other thing, as I have instructed you in the treatment of bowel injuries.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 then treat with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you treat the wounds, if they become infected and heal the injury, until it is healthy again.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is swollen, with no appearance in the wound, and the fire cautery moves easily at this spot, bringing more healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	For softening of the hardened skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Many times the skin of the joints is softened in some individuals because the cartilage within them becomes softened, and it appears milky.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 And it is necessary when one wishes to treat it, that they lay the patient on their back and cover with a cloth moistened over the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 Then bring together the two edges into a stitch, and if you see excess on the moistened skin, first do so with three stitches or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Then cover between the stitches, and cleanse as with other wounds, until it is dry, and let the thread come loose.
dou chastrement	By burning method
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Know that contaminations are removed in our law, and because I prefer not to discuss it, I will not mention it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 and they are necessary for two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 the first is that the masters will answer when asked about their practice, and in their practice.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 And the other one, because we often need the castration of certain animals to assist us, as with goats and sheep and deer and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 I say that castrations are done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In that which we perform by attraction, we seat the beast in warm water until its scrotum is softened and tender.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 then grab with your hand, until they are repositioned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 Of the cutting treatment:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary to hold the best one and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the bandage, and wrap around each foot after you have properly scraped them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 and leave no sign of a dead sore and the subtle sore that is under the veins.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 and this method of cutting treatment is more effective than the one done by drawing, because in the pulling technique nothing may remain with the joints, causing the best to crave dislocation.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are individuals who possess both male and female reproductive organs or traits. This condition can be referred to as true hermaphroditism when an individual has ovarian and testicular tissues, which may be separate or combined in a gonad known as an ovotestis. False hermaphroditism occurs when there is the presence of only one type of reproductive organ along with secondary characteristics of the other sex.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 The one is such that between the two testes they look as if naturally of a woman's shape, and it may have hair, or occasionally urinates from there.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other method is for women, with swelling as much like a rod and two knots.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the treatment of man and woman is such that you bandage all swollen joints, and treat them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second way, for men whose urine flows without control from their scrotum, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Of the lice-bringing
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 Gangrene is a swollen joint on the natural part, too ugly to look at;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 And some women experience this as greatly as with a hand, and it is their affliction.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is necessary that you gently bind the swelling of your hand or ankle with bandages, and lightly wrap them.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do not tie too tightly, lest blood circulation be impeded, then the healing process of another remedy until it is healthy again.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 and to another herb that is found by the mouth of mares's tail, and milfoil, and sometimes it grows tall, and it appears similar to knotgrass; thus the ancients called it "kowe disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to address this issue as we have explained through practice, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	Of rocky terrain
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 Erratic if a woman's nature is not discerned, or her pores are small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 And it is caused by birth or accidentally due to illness coming upon them.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or it occurs from being struck, or by a subtle snakebite or spider bite, and is caused abruptly in the joints, or on the limbs, or above, or where it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 And it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly the ability to have children.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And one can recognize this if by observation of the bale.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling is presenting itself in early stages, whether it's on both sides or one side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is from a subtle snakebite, and he becomes pale at two months, then act quickly, and do so thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 Place your fingers together, and the woman be on her back with legs spread apart.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 Then extend both elbows fully until he turns red from the snakebite and overcomes it through sweat.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 Then take wool, and meal in oil, and apply it to the place, and let the woman massage each day so that it may not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the soreness is hard and spiky, it must be cut with a surgical instrument resembling a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If there are punctures from nails, suspend them on the string and cover.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 and have antiseptic remedies such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, in abundance of eggs.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 then apply a wide bandage so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 and thus it shall be prolonged, and dress the wound with a tent of dry flax.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then administer other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 When a boil comes to pass on the arm, it must be covered as follows, unless there are incurable abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 Because of an increasing abscess on the arm, do not attempt to treat with fire.
des emorroides	Emotions often involve feelings of discomfort or distress related to situations affecting one's internal state and external conditions; in the case of hemorrhoids, it concerns painful swelling around the anus due to vein inflammation.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Effusions are veins that overflow without usual habituation, and when effusions are old they become tumorous.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 And we have observed similarities to those mentioned before, and signs, and I will now say which ones receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that morbus and hardening when fully in the arm, they do not appear to touch, except by curing with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the beginning of the arm, which can be felt, these can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the bone with tongs, and wrap it at its roots, then apply powders of restraining medicines such as those made from hawthorn berries and dragon's blood resin and incense.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And if bleeding persists, make her sit in a concoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranate trees and hawthorn berries and elderberries along with similar things, then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and onion juice, and place an embalming cloth over her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it becomes inflamed, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, apply heated cups to the back and avoid touching the nipples.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take linen, and the hair in juice of plantain or elderberry with wine vinegar, and apply to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess is healed, treat the area with ointment until it becomes healthy again;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 and those called "albatyr" are red and resemble raw meat in appearance, if it needs to be covered as I have written earlier;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then treat them until they become healthy again.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the rectum
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscesses come in the groin area, such as chancre and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, itching diseases, fistulas, hemorrhoids, burning abscesses, and various other maladies that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that appears on the arm, which is not just any kind of pus-filled sores.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 If you wish to know the work of iron, look and see if the abscess is warm and in its beginning stages when it appears, and with heat and fever, and if it turns red as you can observe.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not rush to cut, but wait until the pain is eased.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 And then make the patient sit on a chair, and have them bend or lie with two small pillows under them, and support their back and bring together the parts of the leg that are away from each other.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligament.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then turn the ball into his right ribcage and adjust the instrument used to work inside the mouth of the femur, which is then formed.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 And it is necessary that when you see this situation, use the instrument by inserting a rod to determine how deep the fracture is, so that what enters from the instrument does not go further than it should and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 And if the fractures are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the fracture with cloths so that the fragments do not harm.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And it is necessary to place the cone from the instrument above and cleanse the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when the abscesses are open, and they can be touched with bare hands, it is necessary to cover the head with cloths.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the bowels are empty, one must put in the wound soaked bandages with rose oil or dried greenish oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 And place the bandage firmly over the wound near the head of the bone, and wrap it down towards the bone and around the forearm with clean, damp cloths if they are badly cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat after two days of ointment application when it heals, until it is healthy again.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 And never lift the bone or wound with a water and honey enema, then again with water or roots of lily and aristolochia cooked long.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then return to applying ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed on the skull, it is necessary to avoid using iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 First, it is necessary to know the natural childbirth posture, and the signs if you see the woman hastening the time of labor, and desires scent.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 Then you must quickly move to deliver the child.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 Thus say that such children are following a natural pattern, and the firstborn is alongside its head, and the next in line with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 and when you see these signs, then gently press their belly, so that the child will be born soon.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 because when it begins to emerge from its head, then the next one is with it, and the child's skull is cleansed by good hygiene.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 and this one that comes in a different way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 For it comes no time upon its feet, and the body or head, and hands come upon its belly or buttocks, and are turned by chance on its neck, and other unnatural shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 It is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these matters, and to avoid error and deception; I will show you all the ways one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If a child naturally emerges from the head and the woman is in great labor, and the vitality of the child is weak, then one should have it sit on a seat or be held by women.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and warm his natural substance with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, then the bailiff should place between his fingers a small cataplasm in this form.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and split the second phalanx, and wrap it with bandage until the swelling that has come up subsides.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and massage the woman's belly until the child is born, and if it does not descend, one must perform an enema on the woman using a mixture of fenugreek seed oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 Then cause him to press and sneeze due to condition, holding his mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Now strain the child's urine.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And if the veins appear swoln, it is necessary that you gently compress them a little and a little.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her legs upwards.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then stand the seat on the ground, and wet the woman so she does not move uprightly.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, cover the hands with a cloth placed here beforehand, and extract the child, then gently compress it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 From around the child's feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the child comes to its feet, you must push them upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 And then turn it little by little until it is evenly aligned.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then grasp the pieces and extend them a bit at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 If it does not reach as far as desired, then instruct to press, and make it cough up discharge if needed.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it is still stuck, may God will it so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not extend as we have said, if the turn is little and little, until it reaches its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	they can t. Slavage;
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not come out as we have described, then take musk oil of high quality, and linseed oil, and melted resin, and grind everything into a fine powder.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 Then apply the mixture to the inside of the woman's womb and let it remain there until reaching up to her ribcage.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 And when it has turned into a paste below, then take the tincture of myrrh and apply it there, leaving it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then make it sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and hold its mouth and nose, and press the belly lightly, as the child has just been born now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From under the child's knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When the child comes in this form, then let the midwife apply her hands gently and sparingly.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 then lay it on its side with its head downwards, and hang its feet upward, and let it lie beside the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 then bend its hands gently and slightly, and then press the hands above the belly, and remove the pillows from beneath until it is turned upside down.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 and if the child does not cry, take its feet and move it properly, then raise the belly upwards, and place your hands on them.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And you gently move the child a little at a time;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 And instruct the mother to breastfeed as long as the child suckles.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the time of the child's birth, keep a hand on it as if widening its grasp
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is necessary to engineer returning the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 If it cannot be returned, then lift the woman and go away;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she cannot walk, make her lie down on the bed with her legs bent.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then treat the swelling as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair and then study how to return the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 And you move the child according to natural posture, and make her sneeze, commanding that she breastfeeds as long as the child suckles strongly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the dislocation of the child's head from its neck, with hands spread wide, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is necessary for the barber to wash his hand, then turn it slightly and slightly, and rub lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when it is balanced, if you place the sticky musk and oil as we have said, then command that it moves slightly and slightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And once you have done this, if you place the patient on a seat, then command them to move.
et la fai esternuer.	 and let the patient sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, every other time resetting
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When it comes to this in such a manner with the second treatment, cover the nail of your thumb until the moisture is dried.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 and if it is hanging on its face and neck, cover the mouth, do not hold back, let the child move.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 Then insert the child back inside as needed, properly positioned, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	 Then if it shifts slightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the release of splints.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that many times germs appear, and never four or eight at once.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not a strange thing, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Two are strange things, and do not live, if ever named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that they multiply, and are dispersed by the scorpion who rides them, which is connected to bile.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And never do they emerge naturally like a stream underneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if they emerge suddenly, as we have described, and it is the subtle bile, and quickly and lightly does what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And make it as he properly moves for health.
de plusors enfans	among several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 At no time are they formed in the maris I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, nor more up to XV, and they all take shape like a child by the measurement with the glorious needle, and it is fitting that the barber understands this, as sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 And do according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	that dont the same leue doit li its time sofaire remedy; and his skillet or craft, he not can is a word, si come the after they are craft est et artiste with your art done
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you treat a woman with either a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and there is no expulsion, and you are compelled to perform surgery by hand.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 And if it is necessary for you to determine whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no injury or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 If it is necessary to lie supine on her back, with her head tilted forward, and legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And the minister must remove the thorn from two parts, or if it is attached to the bed, so that it may be treated by childbirth.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then rub the mouth of the maris root with oil soaked in almond meal and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and muscadine.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then gently place the maris root into it, and encourage them to eat what is necessary for this purpose, being careful if the child is prematurely born so that they descend upon their head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the oncines are placed in their ears or neck or mouth or behind the palate or under the beard or near the jaw or beside the ribs, and if the descent is above the feet, then they stick out or twist and ache in the middle of the sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And it is necessary to tie the sling with his right hand, and place the pillow between his left thumbs, and he should gently push with his whole light hand, and insert the sling into any of those places we have mentioned, until it fills.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 And this is the shape of the sling:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then insert against the other sling, or wherever you have need to extract it, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 And then extend equally by moving from one side to the other in order for them to come out, and let the slings be separated so they can hold their shape as described.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 And if it remains a part of them, and he grabs any of his thumbs with oil, then put the rest in that part, and pull on the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If there are none remaining, place this incision or higher up, and do so until it slips out freely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back due to gripping, it is necessary that you wrap above the shoulder strap until it slips off completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then the bandage on the joint of the foot or calf and so you must do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the child's head is large and it gets stuck during delivery, or has a swolamoist head, you must insert the pointed instrument between your two fingers, and push the forehead and extract the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 Now you take it to the instrument called "almizate," from which shape is formed with the strum or paste that follows this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 And in the same manner, make such for the child naturally of great character.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 and then treat the bones with pincers, and if the head is thrown out and held by forceps, split them until the moisture that has come forth is cleared.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 and if it cannot be removed, chop as you can move with your knife.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 and if swollen in the belly or under the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	Oudiez andre t (don; they same-Miel: Caufft the fact; endre.this c[at; If you not s. The oughts.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if swoln in the belly or udder, it is necessary that you extract with a drainage bag wrapped around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 And make them vomit or urinate, as long as the moisture inside is correct.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if other members are aching and the head is prolonged, then support their hand firmly at the base of the skull, and treat it up to the mouth of the foramen.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then apply ice or poultices, and continue treatment.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And if the skull foramen is closed due to a hot abscess, do not agitate it further, but instead administer moist and fatty substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 and apply emplastrums, cut into fresh, softening, and moistening solutions.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the child is on its back, put it upright, and treat as we have described for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if one cannot hold it together, then let them cut it into sections, leaving nothing of the secondary parts.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, treat as we said for abscesses that appear on the bone;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 and if there is bleeding from inflammation, it should be treated with an appropriate restraint, and other remedies applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with the child in her womb dead, then buried one, and resurrected the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time an abscess came in his mouth, swelled so much that it burst, and began causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	the scaron; he lis, etc. If they gue tret; teli lesse t (c: icheys Droit line.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place on strong attraction, and from it comes an bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I am greatly troubled, for there is no bone in his belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were bones from a deceased child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I will show you the wound, and when treating bone fractures, aim to improve as much as possible.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 and let it heal for a long time this way, so that slightly begins to return to the original place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 and I remember this chapter is for when your master encounters an unusual thing that he should know how to handle it with care.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	f s's unt:
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 After this comes the method of compression, to which one applies the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 And at two turning points are the heads of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 Nevertheless, the horns should be more delicate for restriction, and made of ivory or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 And let the mouth of the rod be one hand's width wide, and the edge of the trees half a hand, and long one palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 And amid the two ligaments there should be two adjustments of this same rod, which are firm in both, half a palm long or slightly more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the malleus to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, is made of ivory or boxwood rod, according to the resemblance of pincers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 And it is two shoulders dislocations, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 And when you see the mallet opening up entirely with the instrument, make the woman sit on a chair with her feet and legs outstretched, then place both dislocations together in the joint, holding the head of the instrument between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Then work your hand with the instrument as you have done with the pincers evenly, according to the quantity that opens the mouth of the joint until the bailiff performs what they want.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 This instrument is all overhead, and there are multiple similar ones.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the bailiff has equipped them, then the work becomes much faster, and higher in price for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared it, for its necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to hold her alaunates back, and then make her sneeze with certain conditions, and restrain her hands at the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 And if she leaps because of this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, take a pot, and make an opening or lid, and put in herbs that could open the mouth of the mare (referring to childbirth), such as chamomile, rue, anise, calament, saxifrage, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs, or any of them, should be boiled in water over the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 Then put a gauze or lid on top of the pot, and hold it against the mouth of the mare (referring to childnertaking), until the vapors come into the mare.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 Then you make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If one strains the second rib jointly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, command the nurse to moisten his left hand with oil of sweet almonds or with high-quality musk, then apply it there, and if necessary, do a second treatment.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when you find it, gently pull and stretch it gradually so that the bone does not break during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, then rubbed.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 And it will come and relax.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the bone is too long, as we have said the treatment is to induce sneezing and fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 If it is not of all this which we have said, ensure you do not mistake with regard to treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 However, it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the hernia, to tie it to the thigh of the woman, then to clysterize with medicated ointment using four-part medicine.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 if you manage to reduce and reset it, it will come back strong.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 but always, when it recurs, should it bring a foul smell to the stomach and head, and weaken the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 If necessary then, fumigations with frankincense for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 None of the old have tested fumigation using parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman to retain the flowering and secondary hairs is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it seems like an inflammation, placing the head subtly in its natural state, with wide eyes near fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And so there are fumigations over the embers, and for lichen until it is consumed, then start again with another.
de percier lou fondement	Of dissecting the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Children are born who do not have the solid foundation perceived; instead, they possess subtle veins.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 Therefore it is necessary for the physician to pierce those subtle veins at their right place, and not with a large needle, and be careful that they do not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the cloth in wine and oil, then perform the salve treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you suspect that it pops out again, then place or tie a bandage of cloth around it, and let it remain for several days until the child wishes to move in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And never does this vein puncture occur from a wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	 If it is necessary to perform that vein puncture:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 If you treat them thus, as we have said of the bandage wrap.
de la fistule dou fondement	for the anus's hemorrhoid
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Hemorrhoids that arise from the base are inflamed, and those growing near the base deteriorate within two parts, whether in one or several hemorrhoids.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 And when such inflammation is old, work on it, and if moisture causes white or subtle pus, then these hemorrhoids are never cured.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 And they are known by what comes out or emission and flatulence when the patient expels, and sometimes with an odor.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And if there are hemorrhoids near the bladder, and up to half of the penis.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And they reach up to the hip joint, and down to the outer part of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 Thus one finds a persistent fistula at the base (foundation), but not leaking.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And you should insert your index finger or base (foundation), and insert a slender needle of silk or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 And if there is twisting, you should insert a slender tent (probe), or horse hair, as long as you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 and if you do not feel it, and there is no pus discharge or foulness or stench, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 say that it does not perforate (perforate).
si te haste dou curer.	 If you quickly cut there.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	eisnt ce quater les que sont s;
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the veins come near to that place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 If there is no curvature and the pain persists within it, then he must remain bound, and neither medicine nor frequent ointments help.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And for these persistent fistulas there is no effective cure except through hard work, and the futile efforts of foolish men who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In that which is not persistent and is not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron as I have tried, and it is where the sick man lies between your hands on his back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 and you lift his legs up to his hips and incline his hips towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 Then apply a tent of pitch or wax if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent lies.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels numb at the base, it is necessary to apply a tent with your index finger if you sense that the tent has penetrated.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and if you feel exposed or any lice or worm between your finger, then know it is present.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 but do not attempt if it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 It happens in all cases that one can well heal some, but this occurs rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 and there is aid in what you do, which is to apply the subtle fire of cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 And it boils all hot within the abscess, until it reaches near the base.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 and do this two or three times, until you know that these forked stones have settled, which appear like the quill of a bird.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 and then treat the lined tent with butter until those stones have moved outwardly, then apply a salve that joins and solidifies them.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, that's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If this is not possible otherwise.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 If it attempts to pass through, and does not penetrate quite to the root which is at its foundation, and between your two fingers and tent an envelope of thick pitch or silk, and you see the abscess on whoever applies the envelope with heat.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 If you begin to close the abscess and push it back before tenting, and then apply cautery afterward until it reaches the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 And the tent will be released, and healed.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Then correct those deformed characters that resemble a bird's feather, and none shall remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal quickly, cut between you and the work, either fire-cauterized or medicated with a salve.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 For fire cautery brings together two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 That is to say, the drying of these dislocated characters, and the binding of blood and removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 Then treat the tent-like hernias either by burning or cutting them up, as long as the wound continues to flow pus, and insert a plug in the opening.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Then treat the wound with sudden boils by burning it down, and they become dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes to the very bottom of the foundation, and is distant from the body, you may strike either the knee or ankle joints with it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the hernia and there is cloth or fat or charred tissue within it, or if it's ready to be pierced, then rely only on faith and hope through one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 or you cauterize it as we have said, or cut to the bone, or if possible, remove hernias and treat them as previously instructed.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 and do not go too deep, for you must not cut the structure that holds the base, as expulsions may come by their own will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 Then treat as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 In case it is uncovered or you remove the covering and cleanse after being close to the foundation, using a probe or another instrument sharpened.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 Then repair that damaged tissue which is in the wound, as you know how;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 Then examine to restore the wound and keep the fistula at the part further down from the foundation;
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If it were an easier thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And no times are fistulas according to this manner;
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is or close to the foundation of the skin above, then take a pierced probe according to this form;
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert a twisted thread into two, and sew the tent with all the threads until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is pricked at the edge of the socket within, then extract that thread from the pierced one and insert your finger or socket.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 and straighten the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, holding them in place, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 and support it securely until the threads bind to each other, and heal completely.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 then treat the wound until it is united and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, try to drain it in every way you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make a large incision if possible, but then the healing begins as we have said, until it is sound.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of the needle-like spatula used to make a fistula is very sharp and pointed, one side being blunt.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and on the other side not, because it does not cut as it should be cut when you see this way:
des emorroydes	the les su; if:s, howd. If yout f: bonge.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 In some cases, there are two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 In some cases, they are ingrained in the foundation, like resin grains, and there may be small or large ones, and from which blood comes forth again, and there may be one or several, rendering the foundation weak and the top of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 but those that are worn have little moisture, and from which a bit of yellow water or blood comes forth, and they have the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 and the treatment for those that are ingrained in the foundation is to instruct the patient to urinate frequently until the foundation weakens and cracks appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 if you act hastily, or use pincers holding it by its nail, then cut out to its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 If they cannot hold them with their hooks due to moisture, then take them by thread or cotton, or from a strip of camlet.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 And extract it with both hands, then bind it, and cover it with hot powders that are in place of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Or you may cauterize as it is said or according to the fire cautery instructions, and heal other ailments until they are healthy again.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 And if the foundation cannot exit, then administer a pungent and bitter enema to wash out what is at or near the base, so that it may exit openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 When they reach the patient, and if there are strong threads near the foundation, then it is a light cure.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 And it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pliers, and clip off the dead parts, then treat the wound as we have said, until they are healed, and so that they fear iron incisions.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 If it is necessary to repair a tear according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread through from above, pierce the needle's other end, turn both ends of the doubled thread away from the needle, making them evenly thick.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 And straighten the thread neatly, then knot it, remove the needle, do so with all others, and leave a bit of excess for stopping the flow of blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 Then place a foundation cloth soaked with rose oil or wax on the base, and apply it to the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then let it remain until they fall off, and when they are shed, treat with ointment or other remedies, until they heal properly.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Also the seat of fibrous tissue or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often it happens sharply within the intestines, and by natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If it is necessary to reset the tip of a stylus or nail and its surface above, do not allow it to become wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 Then treat until it heals properly as needed.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 And if it cannot be made whole again, resume the removal more strongly than before until it is fully healed and scraped clean.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat until it is healed thoroughly.
dou fremit	By a sudden blow
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 A mouse is a small creature appearing on the body, moving much.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 and it never brings coldness to the joints, feeling similar to death from fear, affecting all over the body, especially in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is to take a feather from a goose pen or a strong vulture wing and place it on the shaking, until the purple circle completely envelops the trembling.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 then turn your hand around the feather until you cover all the shaking, moving it freely, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a splint from either wax or iron as shown here, and be subtle below and transparent above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 do not feel, to hold with both hands, and press together.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see it, then cauterize the trembling, as it is in front or by fire cautery method.
de la forme dou clistere	by pa l’sul:d sir toug. Et so ou n'estra;
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Never is one made a silver or lead clister, or of melted brass or pewter.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And never are such small and large suppositories made, according to the one for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Thus in the care of children who are weak and painful, they are small [suppositories].
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of enema small or large is as follows: the belly being tied in this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 and there is a distension or the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced inside;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 and to one side it has a hole, and on the other it does.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 and the belly or his arm has medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around small holes, and between each hole there should be space, then put in these holes a strong thread of twisted linen, X times on both sides, and gather the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 When the medication is inserted, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and here is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and apply the substance of the enema with oil or goat's butter or similar substance, then administer it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 then the minister inserts it with both hands together until full, then withdraws the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to the bedside, allowing the medication to exit as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 and if he sleeps through the entire night, it provides greater relief.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer an enema in the case of intestinal issues, and the patient's health improves, as long as it remains so.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 And if the hemorrhoids are at their foundation or abscessed, make the enema as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And this is the form of a subtle suppository through which the body is restrained.
des plaies	M, even you give them:
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have said in that section on wound care;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 Or we shall speak of hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the locations or the ways in which they are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things by which wounds are made include the thrust of a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or of a lance, club, arrow, or similar items.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 Or those that are made depending on the wounds of the body, as a gash upon the neck, or head, or thighs, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, because memory will come to mind in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 When a simple wound occurs or the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's from a stone fall or similar things, and the skin is always torn and the wound is large, so you suspect hot abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 If a coldness quickly appears on the head if there is little blood from the wound, and it is opposite to the affected part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 And remove the patient's excess fluids with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if it does not cool down, reduce his meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat fatty foods.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 And apply soothing herbs to the wound if abscess occurs there, use a soft-cotton oil or astringent wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 If there is no abscess present, place it on the fresh wound where all its blood remains, and it has not moved from air or powder, which I will say something more about shortly.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the wound has moved due to motion, apply some ointment until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar to it, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, join them with sutures as I will describe for abdominal wounds in stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound exposes bone, and persists, clings only slightly with flesh, you must cover it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 Then treat the wound with medicine and restore its firmness by applying tanned leather, instructing the patient to eat hearty meats as you have tested wheat and cooked barley, likewise fish and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find or feel softening of the flesh, not reaching to the bone, cover it completely with fat and then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without bark, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, you may tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if these wounds are small and simple, there is a light treatment:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And you should apply this powder which sticks as the arrow moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 The manner of using the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	 Take incense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 Blood of a dragon, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 Wax alive three parts, and the powder delicately sprinkled, apply to the wound, and gently bind it, until it dries well and rejoins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 And then securely bandage it, allowing for some loosening unless it swells;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Because the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this should not be done by fire alone unless you have the incense or blood of a dragon; but that the art must heal the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound has moved or shifted in its place, particularly during sleep, do not reapply this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 But apply some digested ointments or ground barley flour made of water and honey, until it heals.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then use other remedies until it is fully healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And if there is a small bone fracture with the wound, extract it using fine tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 and I will tell you about this regarding head fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	From a wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and is simple, without a difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery are severed in the neck.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it's the veins, there is no other option but to let them clot, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the veins and causes them to recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the nature of the veins is cold, and their continuation lies with the brain, which are the highest members.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 but use the medicine applied with warm water softened by salt, and mixed with rose oil, and boil it in water softened similarly, and other remed cupping according to this manner, and moist salves.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch it and bind with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 If wounds are deep and swollen with pus, puncture or drain below them.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 If the arrow is embedded and blood flows inwardly, open it, extract it, and if necessary, cauterize.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 If the spine of the throat is embedded or the kidney, and urination is obstructed, causing tissue to protrude, if possible cut near the base of the throat, but do not touch the throat itself, replace it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then bind securely, leave untouched for some time, and treat with washed ointments until it heals.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 If the wound is pressing on bone, you must address it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 And if there are bone fragments, pull out all you can, and those that you cannot retrieve, leave them so the wound may heal over, and then cleanse and align the edges.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have instructed.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound caused by a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it's a puncture from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if there are signs of venom which may afflict the patient:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Recognize then that the wound is fatal:
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder at once, nor use it to stop bleeding from within, as this could harm the patient:
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 But apply an attracting balm, and bind it for two days.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 And if you do not have a balm, place woolen cotton in the old wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep with the injury exposed for three days or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 If this does not cause muscle spasm or severe body shaking;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the bone properly aligned, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Treat with tent and other remedies until it is healthy again;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if it cannot heal or function properly, then understand that there is an abscess.
si la cure si com on doit.	 If the treatment is as described.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, whether it's on top or bottom, treat as described for such injuries.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it is large, with stitches;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 If it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and there are broken pieces, then you must address the wound and pull out any splinters if needed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not embedded, let the wound heal naturally, and lighten the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And for other wounds on other limbs, apply our judgement as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	And rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The protrusions of the abdomen are large and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 From a large wound, never does it occur that the intestines or their nerves are affected, resulting in contamination from outside;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the stitching is easier to manage, and never is the small wound worse than the large one because it allows for more frequent handling of the intestines when not reset piece by piece;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 Because the intestines swell so soon when they feel cold, thus become more painful, and therefore move the wound inward, since it is necessary to reset the intestines to their place among the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that there are four ways of treating abdominal issues.
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The two common sutures occur in the stomach's incision, and the sutures for other body wounds and two other specific types are common to other injuries.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 Also, they are more suitable with the stomach's sutures, and I will describe each one and declare them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes, this is by one of the four ways mentioned.
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 Or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swoln by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cooled, warm it in a certain manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Dabble an apron or cloth in hot water only, and boil it with salt and pepper, and heat the intestines until inflammation is gone.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And never do this that constricts blood flow, and ensure it is loosened to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see inflammation subsiding, moisten the intestines with water or wine, but cook them sparingly as their passage is facilitated by little food.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 If it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used to treat bunions.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 And the first remedy is to move it that no one should cut without great necessity or need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And this is for splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 If a split occurs in the arch and does not heal properly, then apply this method:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When the wound is large and the intestines protrude, if you can reset it to its natural place in its proper location, because movement aids healing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and located below the belly, it is appropriate to place the patient on their back with legs raised higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 And if it is located below the belly but above the legs, raise the head and groin higher than the lower parts. If the wound in the abdominal area is on one side, balance them so that the affected part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 Thus, one must treat as I have instructed on large wounds and small ones.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 For small wounds do this as you have learned, then take the pus in your hand and place it between your fingers to mix thoroughly, and bring together the edges.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 And this is the common way for sutures, and you should take a needle or several according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave space at the top edge of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 And pierce the two sides with the two sides of sinew, which is underne.the skin close to the deep layer until you have separated that part, and bring together the top edges of both sinews as one.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 Then strain a double thread around the arrowhead on both sides, then immediately reassemble the two heads of the wound, and leave some space, and insert another arrow.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 Then tie the thread again as you did with the first arrow, and continue doing so according to how many more arrows are needed until all wounds are secured.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 and let the arrows be medium-sized, between fine and large, because fine arrows can securely hold together, and overly large ones may not enter properly.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 therefore it is necessary that they are medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 and do not place the arrows too far from the wound or the skin, so they can properly secure and function at the site of stitching.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 Then wrap the head of the arrows so they do not bend and cause pain to the patient while sleeping, and place pads or cloths on the arrowheads for movement, allowing them to remain until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this manner of suturing arrows is more convenient in small wounds, for there may be a single arrow or two used.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second method of suturing is common and involves joining the two heads of the bone with one arrowhead at a time, using an iron wire.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And once you have pierced all four heads together, reset the arrow at the part where you began, similar to how one fastens cloths.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 And place space between each stitch, the size of a small finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 These stitches close the wound, and I sewed a wound that a man had on his belly, which was troubled by a knife, and the wound was wider than one palm wide, and it involved intestines more than two palms wide, and the wound was in the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestines as it had been XXIV hours since, and healed the wound until day fifteen, and treated him, and he was well again.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And the physician judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 and did not treat him with ointment because I was in the place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 and applied clean cloth over it twice a day, and washed the wound with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I will tell you two proper ways of dressing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 Take the needle and thread up to that part inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 When it has pierced the core straight on, then insert the needle head or thread through where you have passed the needle, and make another cut inside to that far-off part.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier does with furs, and leave once the skin from one side, and then return to the other, until the dressing is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second way of stitching, which Galien properly calls it, is as any join together naturally, and apply one head of the skin to the other head, in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Insert a needle or pin near the next vein, and make an incision at that location only, leaving the two heads of the suture.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 Then turn the needle, and pierce it through to that depth with both ends of the suture.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then pierce each one through to that depth with two other veins near it.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And this is the proper manner of suturing, and the most common method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen said this word, but no one can attest to it, that you must sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 And one needle should be inserted from one side and the other from the opposite, as those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And say that when the rupture is within the belly, then the suture is more difficult than with other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 and it is such that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, as also the arrow has moved it, reset the intestines and the spleen.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 then apply powdered antidote with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any salve that is available, until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 and cleanse the thread, secure the knot, and the needle.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healthy again.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if you have no medicine, apply it directly, as soon as it begins to swell slightly, using wool or old cloth and move it twice a day until it is healthy again.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 For in most cases you do not need any other medicines for simple wounds;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 and if you suspect that the wound is infecting the main limbs, it is necessary to grind linen with heated oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints and under the elbps.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 and if it causes pain or swelling in large amounts, and often occurs, then apply black wine enemas, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And it penetrates within, instructing that when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are in distress due to the size of the veins and their presence throughout the entire body, as well as the subtlety of all the organs and the proximity of its connection with the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the spleen protrudes from the wound, reset it as before like the intestines while fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 and if it is old and has become black or blue, you must remove the dead tissue where bleeding vessels may arise.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 then cut out what is between the ligaments and place two fingers hanging from below the wound edge to facilitate arrow extraction, and the wound bowing.
de la routure dou boueil	From the treatment of the eyelid
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases because I have seen a man wounded by a lances' belly.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 And it was the wound on the right side of the abdomen, and became infected and turned into a fistula, and from which there were excretions and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I provided treatment according to what seemed best, and did not stop probing until it was healed, resulting in suppuration of the pus.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw that it had stopped seeping, I doubted whether the patient did not have a problem in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and there was no illness present, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 and several experienced physicians stated that when there is a small wound within the intestines, it must be tied in a certain way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 take fine thread and gather the edges of the wound, then when it opens up like a mouth, place it between the two lips and stretch its mouth out.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 And then wrap the head, and hold it so that it cannot dislocate again, then apply another force afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed.
et cout la plaie.	 and cover the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the head enters the intestines and causes no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestines with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 Take the head of this intestinal thread that is mostly cleaned and then tie it with a fine flax thread twisted, sew the intestine with the needle, and stitch up the wound.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 And this method of suturing is only effective if done in accordance with trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, only subtlety required.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Regarding a fistula, or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Every wound or abscess, when it becomes ulcerated, is universally called "fistula", especially when it grows and becomes bowed back.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And a fistula is the result of improper tissue hardening and bruising, where there is no pain felt, and it appears as swollen as the feather of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 and at times clear like glass, and other times thickened;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 At no time too much, and at other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 And I have spoken in the section on wounds, that any untreated wound is not closed, for it is through only one of the nine causes.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 It means, by the smallness of blood or body parts;
ou por sa malice;	 Or due to its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 Or because there is internal hardness and above the lips, where no blood should flow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 Or because there is too much flesh;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 Or the wound heals poorly, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 Or the medicine used for treatment is not good.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 Or because it is a form of plague infection.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 Or due to the property of the area being slow at digestion and health restoration, fleeing by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 When there are veins or bones.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and treatments with herbs in the section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula made by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Seams that a fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 Because there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, nerves, or the liver, intestines, bladder, some ribs, the spinal column of the back, or any joint in hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 and if there is one that comes to the principal part of the limb and others.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 And all such fistulas are difficult to heal, with only hard work and ignorance being involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is any fistula that does not reach to the place I have said, and you trust in its healing, and observe it becoming known, then take a tent of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight, use it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is twisted, search for a delicate tent of linen, because the linens bend easily around the twisting.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, clysterize it through one of the openings, because moisture quickly moves from one opening to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then choose it carefully with your strength so that you know if there are bones or nerves present and they are inflamed at the front, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand and where it is located.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 And when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the cases I have told you, then follow the procedure as I have instructed, and remove the other part and the corrupted bones within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 and then treat it until it is cleaned, and if the fistula is well placed in the right location, if you should cut into it fully as you can see, then afterward apply bandages soaked in medicinal water, and let them reach up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and then apply compresses with medicinal salve, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 If it cannot be reduced by this method, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, treat with a poultice.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If neither veins nor principal limbs are afflicted as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, reign it until the entire corruption of bone is healed, then treat with various remedies until it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 If it remains unclean, reopen as before, be sure not to go past the extent of:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 And open and scrape until you reach the bottom, then remove all corruption, and return it to its place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if he is thus whole, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 If not, know that the putrefaction is too advanced, you cannot go near it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 if there is no other remedy than the poultice of nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if there is a small piece of corrupted bone that you can extract with tongs, use the appropriate instrument for this, and if there are many bones, extract all of them without leaving any.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 and if the moisture causes difficulty, with no mistake or fear, cover it, dry it, and remove the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot remove them at once, apply something to the wound that prevents putrefaction, and let it be in place until the flesh grows around the bones, and then they will more easily extract the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 If it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, return so much that the darkening has become all bone, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 If there is significant portion of it rotten, and it reaches near to molten bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 if the matter must be scraped away and covered up to the rotting, then heal it until it is sealed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in the man's leg; take it as an example and guidance for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 He was a young boy of under thirty years, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body until materials reached the leg, and it developed into a large abscess, and there was no reason to open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But the surgeons, due to their folly, worked so much on the abscess that it burst, and consumed a great deal of materials, becoming an ulcer, and brought about many discharges causing wetness throughout the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 and many surgeons attempted to heal it for two years, without any skilled hand in the art of surgery, until I was called upon, and saw the leg and the remedies used on him, and what flowed through discharges into his body.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 and it became red on the youth's body, with a citrine hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I built a tent on one of these points, and then searched all the points, finding that each comes in opposition from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 So I proceeded, and examined one of the discharges until I discovered a part of the bone, which found it corroded and pierced, with infection reaching up to the inner bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I knew those that appeared from the rotten bone, and thought there was no other decay except for what I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 And began to heal the wound with strong medicines over long periods, but could not close it up.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 Then I resumed my efforts and found the bone as before, discovered continuous decay in the bone, treated it again, removed more of it, and struggled to close up the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 But I could not completely remove even an inch of bone, and it betrayed me entirely in its depths, so I then reattempted with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 And it became safe and closed quickly, and I did not resume the treatment except due to the frailty of the patient who could not endure more, and out of fear for his impending death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For often the evacuation of blood was bloody, but he recovered completely, and in place of the bone there arose a hard cartilage, which was well-shaped and had no harm or drawback at all, neither on arrival nor departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must thus be treated as follows:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take hold of the ligament, and stretch to the top of the broken bone shaft, and command that it be extended upwards.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 And place another thicker ligament than the first, and tie it to the skin above the bone, then extend the shaft. As you pull the damaged cartilage away from below, expose the cartilage at the level where you aim to heal, so that it does not move with the tissue.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 And place a needle or a small tablet below the bone to help move the damaged cartilage.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And you must treat until as much as can be seen and felt is healed, continuing treatment further if needed.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a joint or part, then expose the entire fracture.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then place a heating pad on it and then move it from one part of the corruption to another, and let the stronger side be longer than the other end of the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And if the corruption is in a joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and move the bone or its contents to another part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 If the corruption continues through two joints, there is no other remedy but double cutting.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 If the corruption is at a finger or toe joint, it may be quite severe, but you must inquire about that corruption and how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 And clean it in all ways you can, but let neither vein nor nerve oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And choose the incisions and sutures for healing these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, as well as their thickness and fineness, their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 And therefore one must equip each type of procedure with its instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 And know that the work will show you the instrument of which you need, according to your knowledge of this art, and its guidance on the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If you consider the instrument you need, choose it according to what is fitting for it.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The head may dislocate or due to internal causes, or external factors.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 And when you have administered the medicine for combating corrosion through medicinal treatment, and it proves ineffective, then cover that limb up to its original place where the corrosion occurs. So the patient may escape either by death or a worse fate due to the failure of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 And the signs are that the limb becomes black and appears as though it were scorched by fire. Afterwards, from this darkness follows the limb's corroding in one member to another throughout the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 If you quickly dress the wound, and if it is from a sting of venomous creatures such as scorpions, snakes, etc., and if the corrosion reaches the head of the elbow, then wrap it and do not give any space for it to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it reaches up to the hand, then wrap the joint as well so that the corrosion does not reach the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 And if it reaches the arm, then bind above the knee;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 And if it passes below the knee, that's fatal, and no remedies can be effective other than in accordance with the extent of its power.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 Do this as such whenever the corrosion appears or erupts:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 If it occurs at the first joint, then proceed to the following joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 And if it comes near or on the arm, reset the entire arm.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 If it occurs in the leg, then set at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 And if it comes over the groin, there is no other remedy but to behead the patient.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And so with the bandage or silk member is such that you bind it above and below, extending some menstrual cloths one side of the ties downward, and others on the opposite side upward, and unravel the cloth which is between the two ties by a width of one span.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then the bandage or silk and place on each side a strip of linen, ensuring that the fabric does not touch the healthy flesh, lest it cause further injury and abscesses to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if bleeding occurs while working, promptly causticate the wound or apply some binding powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then return to your treatment as long as it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it becomes healthy again.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And I will tell you what happened at a certain place in times past:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 It happened one night that it seemed like the glow of fire, and this corrosion began first in his right foot, so much so that it affected the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 And when the man saw the corrosangly, he immediately covered the foot with a cloak and healed it.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 And after long time, the corrosion of his hand returned, and it came to me, and I applied counteractive measures following bodily purification, but could not stop the corrosions.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And I wish to bind his hand, and do not want to, hoping to redirect the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 and also doubted that if I were to cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the body was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 and he became disheartened, returned home, bandaged up his hand, and recovered.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 and I have not told you this for any other reason than that which is done in similar cases when needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 At no time does an abscess form on the nut of the penis, and it remains for so long that it causes a large swelling.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 and then they rise and break through, causing a protrusion of the nut, and the testicles remain downward, as with small animals.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 And the skin above is as fine and delicate as cut silks, not reaching to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "healed" and are not called "abscesses.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 However, if it is so swollen that it reaches to the bone and splits open, it is called an "abscess.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 And if the skin is so raw that you must remove all of it, especially when it is as subtle as silk threads.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and not because of its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you suspect that the skin is hardening, and the decay is not at its core, and the skin is dry like leather, then treat with an enema in this way:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bow that is there has a foul-smelling odor; then you should apply an Egyptian medicinal enema prepared in this way:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 Take ease, and oil, and litargoine, in equal amounts, and put to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red, becoming as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 and then take according to your need, preparing it in water and honey, and applying the cleanser to the breasts, tightening the nipples.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 and leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this number of times until the breasts are reshaped, and they are purged of impurities.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 Et never is it irrigated with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you must take ashes from the wood of vine, pour water over them, then boil it, and for irrigation, until you know that the body is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicines or ashes of water can be used, then irrigate with a mixture of water and honey to which a small amount of litharge has been added.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 Or you shall irrigate with honey and mead watered wine in which the honey has properties to cleanse and purify, and the wine will make healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 And when you have done this, and are certain that the body is well cleansed, then irrigate with what brings cheer to it, taking aloes vera purgative, and prepare it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 When you administer an enema with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned the properties and treatment of ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the pertussis of the chest is small, and that which fills the enema cannot enter, slightly widen it with a rod, and place a tent of Egyptian or Basilisk oil so that it may be widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too wide, let the skin and leave it so thin that the enema may enter, and if the pertussis drip of fluid is above, then cover or place lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the drooping is in fullness, do not irrigate with stool.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 If you cannot pull the skin back as you see fit, arrange it so that the bow is directed to the lowest point where it is, for when the bow is taut, there will be no room for flesh and if you cannot pull the skin back as you see fit, set up in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 that the bow slants slightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 and take consolidating medicines to place on the wound, and spread a cloth of flax over the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 then cover the torn skin at the edge of the wound as wide as possible, and apply ointment on another cloth according to the size of the tear, and place it over the wound to alleviate the tension, and do not remove the large cloth for several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And the one on top of the breastbone often wishes to remove or extract an arrowhead and discern what flows from it, whether it is poisonous or a small amount, or sufficient, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And take heed if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and how much the medicine has spread throughout the body, thus you recognize that the breastbone area will soon be affected too, and approach treatment accordingly.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 And then dress the wound in the morning or on the second day, and when you cleanse the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become foul with indigestion after many days, believe that the breasts are not angry.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle corns come after long periods of time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are people who experience delayed healing in their wounds due to consuming meat, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 And if bowel indigestion causes swelling of the chest after many days, know that the breasts do not become hard.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And if the breasts become hard and swollen, apply poultices of warm dry medicines in substance and dry in virtue, as with an ointment that ends diaphoresis, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and this is the final medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take an ointment that ends diaphoresis, and make it with rose oil, and add equal amounts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	 Then mix and apply.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 And the same is more effective when cooked and swoln, if ointments that end diaphoresis are not present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, crush them, and powder with honey over a fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 And then in glue the bandage, and extend it over the breast, and never apply any ointment or balm, and roots of holy plants, which are similar to ground pepper and flour.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 and with simple remedies or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 and grind them into powder, and mix it with the honey as mentioned, and apply.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 and if the wound is extensive, and not healed by this treatment, then understand that infection has set in deeply, causing pressure on the bone or hard members, or ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 if it's a fistula wound healing as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the nail's abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 A panaritium is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the thumb or toe, or sometimes appears in other fingers.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 When it is neglected and not cared for, if an abscess comes, it will burn, boil, and flow with pus until the root of the nail is reached, and by chance may consume it entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 And comes to the decay reaching the bone, causing a stench and pain, with shoulders wide apart, and discoloration is evident.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have explained in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, then you must cut out all the excess tissue associated with the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 Cauterization provides great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 And if the nail is consumed by worms and begins to point, and decay occurs, then you should cut off the root of the nail where the worm burrows, pour it upwards, and gently but thoroughly scrape away the substance, then apply medicines with burning and corrosive properties on the remaining area;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if there is decay in the bone, when cured and treated with force, because as long as the bone decays it is, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if you see the joint decaying, treat with force as previously mentioned, then treat until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 and if it is painful and swollen, and causing great pain, first you must anesthetize it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 then cut the thick nail with a transverse incision below it, but be careful that the cutting does not reach the quick which is under the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 and if it occurs, put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of dislocation is felt from below at the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocation that is found in the hands of some men by chance is all flesh, and sometimes there are bones present, and at times none; these do not originate from the root of the joint where they are formed.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 Those who are born with any deformity of the foreskin do not move, and those born at the junction of the foreskin may occasionally move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The size of one who is plump should be lightened in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Trim it at the root with a wide pair of scissors.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 Those born in the junction's root are greatly difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	 If you do it with care:
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For the one that originates from behind or beside the nearest bone, it is necessary to first cut around the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate sawing motion, and then heal it until it is sound again.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Dislocations arise from a joint being out of its place, occurring either by birth, or by incision wounds, or scorching with fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 If it is necessary that you cut the swelling, so that it may heal according to its natural shapes:
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 Then place between two tents or linen cloths wetted with oil of roses, so that they do not stick:
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or you put between two pieces of fine gauze, until the lump is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sensation comes to any of its fingers with the palm, then bandage accordingly as it should be.
des vils	 The wretched ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 These are large wounds covered with excessive melancholic fluid, which come upon various body parts.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 And they more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than elsewhere.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must provide them relief from pus at any time, and then clean the bladder ache with camphor.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment with iron is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 the first is to wrap it and bleed black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The other method is to lift the vein, and tear it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 Healing follows this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 The first step is to bathe the leg in hot water until it becomes thoroughly softened, then hold the limb by the thigh up to the area below the hip and towards the outer part of the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 Then make an incision in the area selected, either one, two, or three times wide. Next, extract and remove the black blood with your hand from one end to the other until the healing power of the sickly body is no longer able to bear it.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 And then bind it up, instructing that they be nourished with meat-based black dye;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And begin the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are filled, causing discomfort to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The movements of his limb are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Raise the patient's leg, if it has many hairs, then give him a bath, and rub his leg with hot water until it turns red, causing the veins to swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 And if you do not have bathwater, heat it by fire and then apply the cloth to the veins long at the leg's top near the knee or below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 Then wrap it with cloth and scrape the veins from each side until they feel as if you can sense them.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or through leather appears like a whitish cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then pull the thread out slowly as it passes through the skin, and then secure it to a light hook, then tie in another place on either side of the thighs.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the skin on either side of the vein until it appears, then lift up to the root as you have done, and tie it off with another ligature as before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then make a second tie or more if needed, then lift it up and secure to the hips, then pull tight until reaching the next tie.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then extract from knot to knot, ensuring all force is removed, then cut it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 If you are unable to pull it and lift it up, then insert a strong, thick needle through the entire thread, piercing and pulling out both ends. Insert from under the skin, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes loose.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And ensure that it does not scar over, for if it scars over, it cannot be pulled or lifted out, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have fully extracted it, then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the vein is twisted and tangled together and not straight as we have said, then it should be cut lengthwise but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And the treatment as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The form of iron used to make the cautery is curved, and does not cut, but holds the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 and it has a large curve because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein lies within legs, in hot areas where no grass or trees grow, and on land without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in legs, which occurs from swelling coming from under the skin, as it comes within the body with worms and veins, nestled between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it causes great swelling in the leg, then the lice change, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the shoulder is opened, it must be wrapped around with a piece of linen from one to two and a half cubits up to three cubits, leaving the wool on the leg, and every time there is no defect, wrap around with the linen, and the thread.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, then cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder around, but do not cover it completely at its root until it is entirely removed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 Because if you cut it, then pus enters the joint and brings about abscesses or rot there, causing a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 For this reason, it must be treated gradually until completely healed, leaving no remnants or debris behind.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 And this vein should never be treated with hands for too long or abruptly. Once a man came to me whose vein was X palms in length. When it is cut, I amble the pus out and pierce it all the way through so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 And let it be emptied of any matter inside, and remedy at the site with mordant herbs for a certain period each day, then treat as one would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And never wash the wound with hands or any other objects, especially when it is open at the joint of the arm, and there is much drainage, which causes swelling.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Treat it as we have previously mentioned.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Between skin and flesh where new vessels arise
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This illness is known in our land as "the ox disease" because it frequently occurs in the veins and is caused by a small worm that lives between skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body rising and falling, causing significant discomfort from limb to limebefore it damages the skin or wherever it goes.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And it is caused by putrefaction of various bodily fluids, such as worms and snails and ascarids in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And there is doubt about its severity, because when it spreads through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance entering, it destrobes the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you see it being bled and milked, it cannot be stopped when it spreads:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 So it is necessary that you tie the head above and below a strong joint tightly, then cut around it with a knife, and if the vein appears fully in the bile, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it stops bleeding.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 The greatest harm it causes is that blood vessels may rupture, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 And if you see it approaching or close to the blood vessels, hold firmly onto its eyebrows, then clip and bind them.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 It is necessary for the patient to use bodily purification with solutions of medical substances against harmful humors and meat that has spoiled.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain which arises from swelling caused by wind.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called "wakir" in our land, and it brings pain to certain limbs, then moves from one member to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 And I tell you as such.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to a sick woman, and discovered her with swollen arms, and saw a small inflammation in the arm veins.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And immediately afterward, the vein rises just like a worm in the shoulder, swifter than any other thing, as if silver when cut from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 And the pain departs from that spot, and shifts to the shoulder, and then shortly afterward runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then he told me how it returned within the body, as I have seen it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	by:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 Nevertheless, I wanted to maintain that the pain moved from one place to another, but I had not seen it in the woman as such.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, her veins exposed, and hence appeared to have constant flatulence.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And those who are dislocated due to this reason do not appear immediately as those with dry bodies and veins; and whose wounds have been healed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see treating this illness, and the patient feels that pain as we have said, then press above and below swiftly, and hold it until the swelling subsides to its place.
et cauterize le leu;	 and cauterize at the site.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 and if it is not visible to your eyes, then the treatment of those who swell up like foul pills, and sycamore seeds, and other similar things.
des saiettes	 Of arrow extractions
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	the pain: oughts (a, then heal sofes d, and if they ct; t;
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The variety of their cases is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and smooth;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And of those with two angles, and of those with tongues, and of those where it has protrusions.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and that which exits through any limb in either manner:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or as principal members exiting (e.g., brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidnecks, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs).
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it exits through any of these members, then the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 if one must consider extracting this arrowhead because death approaches in various ways.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 and when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then treat it as such, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 When the arrowhead enters and pierces the bone, causing a sagging jaw above the brain, it results in blindness, pain, straining, reddening of eyes, inflammation and red tongue, mental disturbance with speech mixing, and bilious vomiting.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 And sometimes there is loss of strength in the nose or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 And occasionally it affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 There is a discharge from the wound that appears like white hair, and oozes as red as fresh blood.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 If these signs are evident, then proceed with the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The signs when the arrowhead penetrates or enters are as if it is near the left breast and feels like it has been driven into something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And sometimes the patient moves as well as hairs, with black blood in their veins, and they come coldness and cold sweat, and syncope.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 Then there is doubt that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	the durt; and there (as aul se ues benc!
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if the arrow falls into the lower covering, it is near the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and causes severe pain and sorrowful groaning.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 and they move all of the limb at the shoulder joints.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters into the belly, perhaps from a wound not affecting any of the indigestible meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters into the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if the arrow falls into the bladder, causing it to leak and frequent urination, the patient feels strong pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 Know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other parts - as made by the collarbone, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, forearm and legs, and similar limbs - are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 It happened to a man whose arrow came out or close to the base of the neck root:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I tried it, and on the other side broke through the fat of the ear, and was sound without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And broke through one of the arrows that fell in the fat of the ear behind the paper, and the arrow was reinserted, unable to reach more than just the tip towards its base, and the arrowhead was large like a Turkish bow, easily without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The joint remained sound, and no harm befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 And broke through an arrow in the throat to a Christian, and the arrowhead was Arabian with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I approached the Barbarians, and subtly as I tried to break through, the Christian remained unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And treated an arrow wound at the belly, thinking it was fatal.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and then after passing thirty days, his condition did not change.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut around the arrow, skillfully maneuvered it, and successfully treated the wound without any complications.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And if you encounter a person with an arrow in their back where the wound is freshly made;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 and if it remains inside them, without affecting their natural disposition or causing harm in any of their natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And you see another man where an arrow has struck his face and the wound is made fresh;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and it remained there causing them great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And injure an arrow at one of the king's men, which was lodged in his groin and slightly leaned to the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 and the arrow was fully protruding.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I went called for treatment after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 He holds all with subtle enticement, and she does not perceive it.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt no pressure or pain from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was due to the arrowhead's point. I placed upon him a poultice soothing and digestive, because his eyes were not inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 and it appeared that the wound from the arrowhead remained.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I applied the poultice for two days, and reopened the main wound, so that the patient suffered long times until he felt the arrow within his brain.
et il le me dist.	 and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I applied medicinal acidic remedies to the wound for three days until it healed, and tried them, feeling the arrowhead head detach from its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 Then instruct with the opening of the wound by that medical application, until the head of the arrow appears clearly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 And through it penetrated deeply within four months, and then I tried to push the wound as if using pincers, on one side and the other, but could not.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Then I ceased to subtly and ingeniously devise methods of extracting it, until I was able to grasp it in one day with well-made pincers, as the form will be presented at the end of this chapter, trying and keeping the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I kept it open, and the wound was then stitched up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 Or I have told you the nature of extracting some arrows, so that you apply your care to what I do not mention here, for the book cannot possibly cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 But the wise masters compare few great things, and focus on what is currently happening and failing, working with nine works, nine instruments, at dealing with extraordinary occurrences in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows are embedded in the members only where they have been driven by two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 or through the skin or elsewhere, or from another direction.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and that which pierces because of where it enters is an arrow penetrating into living tissue, and never does so at any other time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not heal now, let it rest until the cartilage is fully regrown, and rejoined.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And also if it has been embedded in the bone, and cannot be removed, let it remain for some days, moving slightly each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And then when it heals, and if it does not heal, carefully perforate throughout with a very fine needle, until the tissues are fully expanded, and then treat.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the arrowhead is embedded in the top of the skull and reaches close to one of the brain's cavities, along with any of the incidents I have openly mentioned to the patient.
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If it cannot be pulled out, but let it rest until even after some days, because if the arrowhead reaches near the spine, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrowhead is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the sinew, and the patient suffers for some days without serious injury, then try to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 If it is stuck so tightly that it cannot be removed thus, apply cautery around it as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wound until it is cleaned thoroughly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if an arrowhead is replaced in the body and cannot be seen, then cover it completely with dressing.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 And if you feel it, then use any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 And if you cannot for the widening of the wound or the deepening of the arrowhead and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then bleed until the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 And remove the arrowhead if you can, and if it has ears that attach to where it's stuck in two parts you can see, break or bend these ears of the arrowhead as much as possible.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And skillfully, do not break the arrowhead, rather pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	:
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if blood deterioration occurs in opposition, apply as we have said for treatment within this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 and be cautious with the incision of nerves and veins, apply method as you know how to extract the arrowhead without danger, whether soon or late, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 and place the patient as they were when the arrowhead fell upon them, for it is the greatest aid that can be provided to them, and if you cannot do so directly, then follow what their signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrowhead that comes from another direction, or through any parts of them, or if the skin is visibly swollen in the area:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Therefore cut down there, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If swelling is now present.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, twist your round hand as much as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull through.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot come out, leave it for a while longer, and then resume the extraction as long as it can be taken out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 and if there is an arrowhead present, strike at all of it;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 and if the arrowhead breaks off, and you see that it needs to be administered with a tool, then place the tip of the arrow into the instrument's handle.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 and strike it again, so if you use an instrument with a pointed end to facilitate the extraction of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is embedded, it's necessary to cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can see it; then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if the arrow breaks or lodges in the belly or bladder or ribs, and is close to coming out, then you can cut it open, but do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And guard against cutting the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And perform the healing until it is sound again.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many methods:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 large, small openings, and tiny, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the pointed hair is also like the feathers of a bird, to thrust at the tip of the arrowhead, as here is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pliers for pushing and picking is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	de la.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 There are veins from which one can draw blood, thirty-one in total, sixteen to be precise:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 II arteries behind the ears, called "Herbich":
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 and two arteries that are visible in two temple regions:
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 and two veins within the joints of both elbebows, called "suctions":
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 and the vein that is above the forehead:
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 And the veins that are at the neck near the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 And the two bands which are around his neck.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 and the two veins that lie on the lips above the mouth, and these are called "augae rigae.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins of which five are commonly found in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 one is the cephalic (headward), and it's on the left side of the arm, called "the vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 and the middle one is called "fast," and it's composed of the cephalic and basilic (bodyward), called by them "the vein of the body".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 and the basilic is on the right side of the arm, called by them "the vein of the abdomen," it's near the elbow, and that one which is clearly seen over the forearm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the surgeon is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 And in the leg where there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 The first one is above the back of the left thigh bone, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right leg.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 And the vein called "nesce," that is in the ankle on the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And in the other leg, there are three veins above those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The pains of the veins that are behind the ears cause ancient cholera and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 And you elevate the quality of the saigner, as I have told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area or veins with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 Then squeeze the patient's neck with a pinch so that the two veins appear behind the ears, approximately two thumbs width down from the crown.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 Take them in your hands and where you feel hair above your fingers, give it a tug.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lancet, and push it up to the bone beneath the vein, then lift your hand all along the vein toward the body, cleanse the skin and vein well two thumbs wide across, and let out blood until you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then strain and hold firmly, until it is realigned.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have already mentioned the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The cleansing of the two arteries that are in both temples is to be done quickly, gently, and with familiarity, and to avoid causing tears.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the quality of the washing should be as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it is that the patient must keep their neck stretched until both veins are clearly visible.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and feel for the pulse on either side of your thumb, then press down firmly.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then lift your finger above the vein on top of your index finger, and place the lancet below it, then raise the vein upwards again, and collect the blood, just as you did with the other two veins, and allow the blood to flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 Then dislocate the patient's arm, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place it on a cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And then bandage firmly, and leave it until it is cleaned.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 And we have spoken about their healing and extraction, which begins this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The cleansing of the forehead vein is just as valuable as the treatment for headaches and ancient skin diseases, and migraines, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 And its quality lies in that the patient stretches his neck by twisting until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 Then take the instrument called "spatula," which looks like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the tip on the vein, and gently press with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then instruct the patient to open the neck, and tie the vein so that it is clean and not bled once with a wide swab.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 Anyhow, you should not make the gauze too wet or dry.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 and placed acrosswise, because the bone is near, and sometimes it breaks the gauze when it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The dressing for the two veins that are in two wounds is to aid with the eyes and gums, and at the beard, and ear lobes, and throat in oil, and skin diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 and the quality of their dressing is that the patient must twist its neck as far as possible, just as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 then change the dressing crosswise, and let it be a little long and wide gauze piece, because there is no lice.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the limb is subtle, perhaps it breaks;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then apply correct bandaging, as much as needed, and then bind with a cloth, and secure well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The pain from the eyes is like ague, and dropsy, and face diseases such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 And the quality of the pain is such that the patient grips their neck, then strains his eyes to the left hand and takes a long subtle limb, and sticks it halfway into the space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well, and now the blood will start to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And do not go too far with it, make a proper incision according to your need, then leave it for one night, as it is often quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 and this is the shape of the bone:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The sinew of the II muscles assists in extending the spine, and at the onset of paralysis, as well as in many diseases, pox, corrosion, shingles, and psoriasis.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 and the quality of the sinew is such that it causes the patient to stretch out their neck from one side or the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 and be the master stands above the patient's head, and the patient cuts a vein on either side, then lets it bleed for some time, or as much as is needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 Then perform a similar procedure on the other vein, then dissolve the ligaments, and gently strain the vessels so that the patient does not suffer.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of spleen fever
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of veins in the lips above helps with boils inside the mouth, and decay of gums, cracks in the lips, and bleeding and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And the quality of the healing depends on making the patient sit in front of you, and gripping their neck as I have instructed.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the lip, and observe the veins, one to the right of the lip and the other to the left, recognizing them by their darkness and the small black vessels surrounding them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 So do both, and if you do not recognize them, or if you are in doubt, then cut the larger one from each side, and likewise with all the veins above and below, as they are of a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of spleen fever under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue is helped after the head's wound healing, and it's related to throat stretching, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 And its quality of healing is such that the patient's veins are squeezed between your hands under the sunlight, and they lift the tongue, and look below on each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Thus heal both of them, but not too much at once, because the arteries are underneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins of the arm that we commonly treat for wounds have their healing methods as follows:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 or by grabbing the entire arm firmly wide, or using an olive-sized and subtle instrument like sharpened scissors, which is called "Aneasil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 And they are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of this flail mistle is much renowned, and wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And it is necessary to open clear veins filled with visible blood that contain much blood and turbidity;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 and it is the form of an olive-shaped bubble:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	Et c'est plus subtilement pointu, et pour soulager les veines subtiles, où le sang est subtilement citrin.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The vein of the base (of an abscess), which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are from below the throat, and neck, and ribs, and belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And it is appropriate for the cautery to drain well, and that it should be washed from the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if it is cut (ruptured) an artery, and bleeding occurs, then it should be staunched as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And it must not be grasped by its hair, but trimmed as with scissors.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the vein does not open clearly, one should extract it and replace it with another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 or you wish to stop its flow, or find it within his arm near the vein:
elle apert manifestement;	 it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 and clip the hair as with scissors, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you see the location of the vein, then remove his arm as such that you feel for the hair until you know their roots.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 then sign the place to replace, and then hold the arm, and clip the vein with scissors-like hair:
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 and be careful not to injure the artery when you see the place swelling, for it is an artery.
eschui la donques.	 Ensure it stands as previously instructed.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see a protrusion upward as the urine of an infant, with red and fine skin, know that it is from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Haste there, and extend your finger over the area, then remove your finger multiple times as often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 If it is on his arm, leave it thus, and do not move the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And be in fear, and do not move him until he is stable.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the skin is not tender, and it bleeds, and you have no medicine available, then tie off the artery if it has opened, for the head of it retracts.
et estainche li sans.	 And bandage the skin.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And take a slice of fresh fishbone, and grind it, then take one half and place it until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 if the dislocation is not severe, that's fine;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 but if it is, then treat as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 and the dislocations are not suitable for various conditions due to the small location of the wound, and the condition of the patient's arm joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The heat of the vein helps by treating blood on top and underneath the skin, because it is composed of the basilica (a bone in the skull) and the cephalic artery, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 and the saigneror must wash off because of the nerve undernehren is at risk. If it's too much blood, he may strike the nerve, causing swelling and severe pain, and perhaps cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, one must cleanse the instrument with oil.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 Then you may pry apart the nerve at your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves and it feels long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The sanitation of the skull if needed helps, drawing blood from the head, and soothing the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is proper to sanitize in the olive oil or myrtle oil region, for this is the safest of all cleansings, as there are no nerves nor vessels beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 Nonetheless, one must choose the lightest option, and do not perform anything during the first time, then start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And occasionally it swells in certain men, for what must be done at the first time, but does not harm them.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is as you think.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you must know about healing is that health cannot be established without preserving well-being and avoiding future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 and so health should be achieved through one of the three ways which are known as:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 that is to say, head, gut, and limb.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 and healing should begin with prayer in spring and after eating in autumn and winter when signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 and one must heal the first day or week after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 Healing for diseases does not have a fixed time but when needed can be done in days or nights at all hours and times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And it does not require bandaging for children up to 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus beyond the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And should not be suckled the elderly who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And if one wishes to bandage in any manner, it is necessary to cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema, if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not pull excessive fluids from the vital organs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 Do not bandage those who are too full of meats, or intoxicated, in any way.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 And one must bandage after experiencing colic pain, vomiting, abdominal discharge, frequent urination in women or travelers, being awake and joining with others, and any other weakening factors, whether from an injury to the body or something else.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then carefully balance the humors if they are large, with meats, drinks, and medicines, if you have permission.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then give the patient a bath if nothing prevents it to subtly cleanse their blood and purify the veins near the affected area, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And advise them to abstain from work, pain, lust, and similar activities;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 Be steadfast and diligent, ensure the healer's hands are raised higher than that of the patient being treated, then rub the arm twice or thrice, then carefully extract the ligament, for if it is too tight or loose, one cannot properly address the issue.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 Then rub the leg until the veins swell and become noticeable to touch;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then grease the shoulder blade with a little bit of old oil; then place your left hand above that vein slightly below the bone where you wish to move it so that the vein does not burst upon striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 For there are veins that flow like cords in the shoulder, and some are so full of swelling that when placed over the blade, it pulls back from the blade, cannot open the vein, and thus they become such.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so one must be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the vein works on the first attempt, this is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 If not, start again slightly below where it was reset, unless the limb is swoln.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if the limb is swollen, and the patient fears it, leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 perhaps an abscess will come;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 nor give him a bath, then resume cleansing if he wishes to.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 and if the boils are small, or he secretes blood subtly and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, probe that vein thoroughly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 and manipulate the wound slightly so that the limb becomes swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the joint swollen, do not begin to dissect again, and apply a little oil of roses, for it eases the body's pain and softens the tissue in this place with the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And thus treat each vein you select with rose oil to stop the blood flow and seal it off.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 Do likewise make tranching and binding when applied to the joint.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If it is too large, carefully sever and separate it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if large abscesses occur frequently, especially when the vein opening is small and you act hastily, apply a damp sponge in water with some heat to it on the joint, and bind for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue of the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or greenish hue, then there is no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see anything of aloe or myrrh dissolved in a mixture with mint, it is a sign, ointment, or similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And often there occurs an abscess and appearance at the sanctity of the bladder:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 So place your hand upon it, and if you find a soft lump under pressure with your hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Then avoid putting anything upon it as we have mentioned, for there may be no artery in the cord.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But make a dry plaster to harden the lump, then apply another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 When blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 And if you see large veins, allow them to be drained until they are thinned.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 If it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And it is necessary for those who are flat and bald, and require blood extraction, to create a wider wound with broad edges.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and maintain them with little and often, shaping by cutting across, not by pulling.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 This manner of maintenance prevents blood stasis and nerve compression, and is better to be done longitudinally rather than broadly.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And for those whose body requires maintenance, give them mashed apples in pear juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If it is scalded, rinse with blood three or four times; and if it has a cold complexion, provide for the patient bread soaked in syrup sweetened with honey, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, with an agreeable scent.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If it occurs at the temple, after the issue of a great amount of blood, then one should inhale a mixture of charcoal and odorous syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to drain his arms, and use leeches at other times as needed, when they are greatly swollen by moisture, let him bleed a little bit and a little bit continuously depending on the quantity of his vitality.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	t c; they have sfite and:
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to treat another part, it must be treated on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 Because there is much blood within the body that has been scalded, causing fever to arise;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 If it requires expressing a large quantity of it and dilating the pores until they are full with sweat.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 Then you must address all the conditions of sweat and touch your hand to its hair when it dries, ensuring that death does not come at the time of sweating, as this often happens when the caretakers are neglectful.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it is not necessary when you see dislocating the arm, and blood issuing a second time, and the wound is closed, so press firmly above.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 If it [the head of the shoulder] has gone out, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 but leave it to heal a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 or you do not touch the dry sore, until the blood which has clotted in the vein flows again, and place slightly moistened dressing on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, let it remain unbound until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bleeding of blood is necessary, let it be bled in the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is bled where the head of the vein lies because it is composed in that manner.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the manner of healing is that the patient dips their hand in warm water until the dressing becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 then bind it moderately so that the veins appear well, and now heal across rather than wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And let the pores be wide, and be very close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot escape from them, place the hand in hot water, and allow blood to flow into the water until there is enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And if it is like this, do not push the hand back into hot water again, because in winter it goes further than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the vein of this hand is more saved from all other wounds, as there are no clots or nerves in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The vein of the thumb on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Strain the hand, and place it in hot water until the veins are filled with blood.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 If the limb is twisted, and if you cut along its entire length, then do not injure anything.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 And do not cut too deeply, for the nerves lie close together and intertwined; then return the hand to warm water if it is frozen in the wound and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have addressed the bleeding as much as necessary, apply oil and wax to the vein and quickly join them together, doing this with each thread.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The remedy for the illness in the left hand is as follows, do exactly as I have told you with the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The physician of the knee is effective for all diseases under the body such as joint pains, retention of urine, diseases of the kidneys, and old ailments of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of its healing is that the patient must put their foot in warm water and rub it until it softens, and lay over the bone joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 and the swelling is at the ankle, and from the foot go out many veins.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 Then cut the bandage or make it wider around the ankle as needed.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you cut above the foot, guard the nerves that lie close by and make the incision as when skinning.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And let there be a slight indentation.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sinew cannot exit, reset the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 If the physician fails at first, repeat again after some time, as the joint is stiffened.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Do not doubt of a nerve, as we have said, and thus make an incision on the other limb equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The head of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle near strong, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to blood heat.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of his injury is such that the patient lies in a bath and extends above the ankle four fingers by twisting, otherwise he does not open the vein.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 and if it opens, then cleanse the wound in all ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 and let them move as you scrape, for the joint is loose, and it is much more protruded than normal.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you cannot reduce it, then tie any part that has opened or is split in two at the back and chest, and towards the small joints, and take care of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 And do as much to correct the blood that you see, then untie the ligament, and place cotton under it, and secure.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 Of the buboes of cupping therapy
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Vents are made of horns, or animal hairs, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 And the evacuation is done according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 either by hitting and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this evacuation that is done without a hit also follows two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 either by very hot heat, or without heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 And evacuation done with a hit and blood extraction is performed in 14 parts of the body, some are entirely at the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 The other one is within the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 and others are in two sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 and the pincers from below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 and the pincers at both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 and the pincers on the elbows;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 and the pincers within both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 and the pincers in both legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 and the pincers on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 and the bleeding does not involve any blood vessels, but rather small veins scattered in the flesh, so it is not painful to anyone, as with draining of veins.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 and it must not be inflamed or scorched with any fire or heat, in no illness that arises from congestion, until all the body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And if it is necessary for illnesses or customs, we must examine each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between every hour.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 For there are those who, when they need to be examined, feel heavy pressure.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 and for those who experience congestion and redness on their face, in their head, and at the neck, along with darkening of the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 and those who experience blood spots in their mouth, swollen tongue, and bleeding.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 and there are those who think, see through blood-filled and painful eyes and deathly things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order to bleed after 3 and a half hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The medicine for the ears is helpful in easing the head's distress... it comes to the eyes, and one should not do this until all bodily fluids have been evacuated.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 This ventilation is at the site of the head's cavity, and it should only be used by those with a cold complexion or who have weaknesses, as it causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And therefore one should not use it without the guidance of a physician, nor by those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	the unt les deux they are;
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 Ventilation through the neck is at the site of the cavities in the head and abdomen, and thus it causes stretching of the bowels, cutting into the channel of the phlegm, and other issues, and distension.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 It should not be done too forcefully, for if it holds too tightly, it can cause injury to the liver or heart and soul.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The ventriculation of II ribs by the collarbone causes pain in the head, otalmia and migraine, strangling, pain at the roots of the teeth, and is located near the sanctuary of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And it is proper to command the surgeon that he express his hand in putting it on, not cutting the artery and avoiding any bleeding out of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 The ventriculation below the chin causes mouth disease, gum decay, and various diseases found in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 It is located near the sanctuary of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Incisions in the shoulders indicate diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The ventriculation of the elbows causes as much pain as from the three veins of the arm since it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 And instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for the flesh is tender and contains veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The catheter placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and conditions below, and it should be large in diameter and made of wool, requiring proper pulling.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 and sometimes, if she were too thin, she would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 and this causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 Legs' catheters drain well, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective against old pains of the kidneys, joints, and bladder, and promote healing.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 They are placed above the knees and ankles, and in all cases, they relieve the body after prolonged use, and bring about swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The way to apply the cupping is that you place it first empty, and do so quickly, and put it on hastily, and move equally, and continue doing so until you see it reddened and swoln, and with a dusky blood color.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then remove, and reset the cups, and observe the condition of the body parts, for there are some with scars, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 If it is necessary to pierce once only, then make wide and somewhat deep incisions.
et suce legierement.	 and gently draw blood.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the vein is large, it should be punctured twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the vein is very dense, it should be punctured a third time:
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we wish to draw blood little by little, it is just once with a lancet.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we wish to obtain much blood, we repeat the process often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if the vein is narrow, use forceful pressure and ensure it ends such that the core is pierced quickly, and for those with thick and hard skin, as well as swollen parts, you should apply hot oil poultices to soften.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 if it is so in that case, use purple oil or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 and if it is inflamed, use chervil oil or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar ones.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 If the one to whom you provide a tender and broad bandage does not need oil, then it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or blackthorn berry water, or gourd water, or porcelain stone water, or any similar liquid.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture should rise easily, using myrtle water or sumac and other similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 Those who have large excesses rise from old wine or water of aloe, or a concoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 and they must not exercise breathing into the bladder before or during a bath, but after the bath one to two hours later.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 and they must not sleep after the ventosation, and it is necessary that they take a bath when needed for ventosation and when they have been vented.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And those who are sick with colic must warm themselves up if they feel too cold and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 If it is necessary to grasp cold things such as ripe pomegranates and endive and lettuce easily, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And mince pieces of meat, and broth from a cauldron, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And those with a cold constitution should grasp syrup of honey, and moderately aged wine that is neither old nor new, along with small morsels, minced pieces, and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 and on the day he resumes his activities, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 it is appropriate to give certain individuals some triacle or musk before dislocation, or afterward, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 and let them be sweetened without adding anything, but only for those who are hot, they should drink it plainly.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The suction cups that are placed without causing pain are those applied over the liver, and joints such as gouty toes, podagra, and over the abdomen, buttocks, legs, and armpits, because these body parts do not tolerate being pierced anywhere, and it is only done in order to draw blood from a limb back into another part, just as we do on the nipples when they are inflamed;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 to remove the thickening present in the limb, just as we apply suction cups over the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 and alleviate pain when there is edema or stone, if you remove it by its attracting nature perhaps the edema, or restore the stone to its original position.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And thus it is done when placed upon the liver and kidneys with retained windwaters, and these bladders are prepared empty to draw out as much fluid.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And never are they arranged with fire, nor filled with cold water like maladies causing excessive sweating; thus the bladder is filled with hot water boiled or water that has had certain medicinal herbs steeped in it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And it should have two pieces of leather each half a palm wide at the base, and with holes around its circumference like for threading a needle, and be made from deer skin on the front so that it does not slip when placed upon the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 And it has among its tools a rod of crossbar made of brass or iron to put on a poultice, and they are large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 Because children's cupping therapy is different from that for adults, and it varies between thinness and heaviness.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And should this cupping be applied to the limb thus:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 Take the poultice of wax or salve and place it amidst the cupping within the rod that lies across the cupping area, so that the heat does not burn the patient at the bottom of the cupping.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 And then place it upon the limb, and you should do so at the percussion points we have mentioned before, such that when desired, steam will rise, and one may remove the cupping.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And apply a splint as before; begin again often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the blister that is made for pneumonia treatment immediately, without an erect penis or scrotum, and it's only dressed when full of fluid, and placed over the limb fully.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Blisters are not dressed unless in limbs where you cannot place blisters due to smallness, such as lips and gums, for example.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 and on naked areas of the body like ears or nose, and others similarly shaped.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 and the quality of their use is that when you find blisters filled with soft clear liquid not causing trouble, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 And they place her on an elevated bed with a gentle pillow, until she is accustomed to it, and has no discomfort in the belly.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 Then you shall wash with vinegar and a compress, then rub the limb until it is reddened, and apply bandages.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are filled and swollen, if it is possible to place a compress there, then apply one, as this works very well afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, raise the limb easily, and then pour vinegar on it abundantly, and then press out.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the wound still hurts after dressing the body with bandages, then apply a linen cloth soaked in cold water, and leave it on until the swelling subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 If there are multiple abscesses, apply crushed vitriol or gallnuts, and similar substances, until they have dried up.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Or place on the half-moon section of scraped veils, and let them dry until they harden in that area, thus sealing it now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if further action is needed, then take additional materials.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the materials do not adhere, rub the blood-soaked area with fresh blood or insert a needle until the abscess opens, and then apply them, allowing them to dry as soon as they feel the blood.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they bleed, sprinkle some ground alum or crushed wool, or ash, and it will harden now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	the d.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and involve the repair and replenishment of breaks and moisture loss.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Know well, dear student, that the madman seeks wisdom from this treatise, which he has never seen in any ancient book nor read.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 And for this reason, such knowledge is strange to our land, for I have never found a good one (book).
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 and I know nothing of it from the knowledge in ancient books, which I have studied so much that I am familiar with its teachings, through experiments, and by habit over my lifetime.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 And I have described in this treatise what is contained within it, and abbreviated at the end, clearly showing the forms of the distortions that are treated, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say that the preface of this book contains the essence of its words and chapters where the wise apply their understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 When any breakage or dislocation or torsions or strains occur in any part, it is necessary to support the patient on both sides with a splint, if nothing entirely supports them, as would befit their age, whether children, adolescents, or elders.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 If the tension is not too great or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 And avoid very cold things such as cold baths, and meats of birds or rabbits, do not drink wine nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill up excessively with foods that cause the veins to be filled with blood until there is no doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 If the patient returns to his first state of health, which he previously experienced.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy nourishment, or viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and beef, lamb, pork, veal, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For certain heavy nourishment represents moisture and more rapid healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that broken and old bones cannot be well repaired or joined according to their nature for the support of limbs, nor those also who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 but pay no heed to joining the large tendons which are stiff and join the limb together, until it is strengthened as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 and do not finish all his work, and for this reason he should nourish himself with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that resemble an arc and others by sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture along a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And in every way have his appetite, and his own proper tools for restoration, according to what memory comes to him.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 And it is known as a broken bone because the limb is twisted and quite open on one side, and lies close to the press of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And when there is no twist or touch on it, and the patient does not feel much pain, unless there is a fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But it can well have a twist, a split, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary to move your hand at all, but apply the following remedies immediately and then gently strain now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And know that the fracture hanging down, and are two parts disjoined, now they must be made equal lest it become an abscess.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 And if the abscess arises therein, let him not delay any day until the abscess is soothed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 Then make them equal to what you can easily and healthily move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than in those where there are fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 Then restrain as appropriate thereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 And if the bone is in pieces and it extends on two parts, whether it's arms or legs, or to your hand if it's small members, or two tendons, or one tendon and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 And place the member according to its natural form, so that if the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset them by any means to their original positions as they can be moved, and ensure through your crafting no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best possible forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And feel well with your hand if it seems not rightly done:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If the reduction is done well, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who induce abscesses hot and constriction in the limb have seen us many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the limb is at its limit, so gently restrain the patient that they do not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 and ensure well that the limb is secured so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For when it feels no pain, it is not at its limit and one must place it in such a way that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 and you must ensure that it is positioned correctly, so that twisting does not occur when restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 And the condition of the broken limb is as follows, just as I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	; that he est la:  (e patience de se mar :
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members such as bones and tendons:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 If it is necessary to wrap with thin and delicate linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 And those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 If it is necessary to wrap with a wide and strong ligature, because the wide ligatures encircle the entire large limb equally on all sides so that there are no irregularities.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then it is tied with light padding for three or four turns depending on the limb, and the hand is slightly tightened along the entire ligature, then moved to above the fracture and loosened there, so that the breakage moves slightly away.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 And soften the ties a little at a time, until you grasp a significant portion of the joint's natural state, then take up another tie, and return it correctly to its original position.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 Then go back to the part without the breakage, and strain it moderately, neither too much nor too little, as we have said in the first instruction above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then place between the stitches linen or cloth so that they are all evenly matched, then secure everything above the binding, and then put in well-made stays underneath, unless there is an abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is inflammation or an abscess, put on something soothing for the abscess heat, and that removes the inflammamo.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Then strain the affected bones and have them bound with a wide leather strap or wood for splints, as shown in this diagram.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 But it is necessary that the affected bone placed on the break should be slightly larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 and so also long as needed for small or large limbs;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then strained on the bones in the same manner as the first splint above the fracture, and tied with a thread if necessary.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 more tightly it is, the less so;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and it should be moderate in thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of fine flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 because if the thread is thick as I have seen with works of folks who make their linen cord reels coiled up, it's a great mistake, for the splint cannot be evenly distributed if it is too fine, and it must not have less than two inches space between each bone.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the pins after being tightened to healthy places, then place cotton or linen rags on them so they do not slip out.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment as follows:
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to extract all shattered bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 When the limb is large, it does not require immediate dressing but rather after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the risk of infection.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 And then follow the manner of ancient embalmings to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And take some flour that is held against the mill walls, and mix it with abundance of egg, and apply this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, for it is a common way to restore fractures in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another method of embalming that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take bile, aloes, onion, aspetide and frankincense, and myrrh, one spoonful each.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Mirrorwort and aloes, five spoonfuls each.
alechil VIIII З.;	 Alecites, nine spoonfuls;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 And make powder, and mix with honey and egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster because it has good composition and quickly mends broken bones, benefiting many individuals.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another kind of plaster that works for twisted injuries:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Take myrrh and violet leaves, one spoonful each.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Mirrorwort and alechites, nine spoonfuls each.
acaice VI З.;	 Acacia, six spoonfuls;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 On Wednesday of the Fast of St. Martin, boil Armenian spices with wine or plentiful water and conserve it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another method to reset dislocated joints and bones from their place, which alleviates the pain that occurs, and it is used for breaking the bone and fractures.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new linens, soak them in ease and cooked oil, and place it upon the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These bandages do not restore, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly alleviating the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another method to reset broken bones that restore their integrity:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried leaves of the fig tree and earthly parrot's leaves, grind them together, and use as a splint.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to bandage is for the healing of broken bones and remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, and barley meal, one part from each;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 And you mix it, and with wine, and if the limb is swollen, then with vinegar mixed with wet coriander water or plain water, and apply it in use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way of plastering more effectively than the first, when an abscess is ready to heal on its own in member restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take roots of valerian, and flaxseed, balm, honey locust, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 And you grind them, and cook with salt water or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its resting state.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that nothing else should be applied to the broken limb for healing other than a mixture made of wax and oil, and it should not be too hard or too soft within two layers.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that dry and slightly warm substances should be applied to the broken limb for healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another method of balm that is suitable for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Take the shavings and feathers of cocks or bird's quills, valerian root, and equal amounts of each; grind them up, and make an ointment from it and apply it thereon.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 And then slightly move it again, and be careful if the patient feels no pain or has not moved the bone back to its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 If you do not manage to relocate by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if pain comes to the place, or itching, a sense of rest, or swelling occurs, hurry and relocate, and remove the splint now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 and take light bandage, and use a damp sponge, and soak in water, and lift the place up until itching stops and pain is eased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and wrap it up with a bandage until you are sure of heat from abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 And place it on the inflammation of the limb, and if there is bone pain, then resume gentle movement, and a little mustard plaster, and do not stretch it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Resume subtle movements until they are suitable.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and ligation, then begin again as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not reset it except after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 and never leave it for 20 days, as we see that until the fracture heals, approach the joint above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 then reset it more than first time, and let the wound swell with flesh, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 and if you see that it dries more than necessary, know that there will be no healing.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Rose from warm water every time you dislocate it, and do so daily, letting it rest a while.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 So in this treatment also sever the nerves of the limb and quickly remove what are done by the ignorant physician who return the limb wrongly.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 It is bad and such treatments are fearsome, and I see nothing else but the lazy ones and those who work directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes differ;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bones all shatter down to the fascia which is below the bone, as if struck with an axe or club;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 And because of this, this manner of fracture is called "hachure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or the sword breaks the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 And there are wounds from these two types of large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is impacted, cracked, or from striking against stone, falling on stones, or similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is an open fracture reaching the skin just below or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if there is a wound that heals in the bone as subtle as mouse hairs, and it is a small crack, and therefore this fracture is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 And if the wound is made by being pierced with an arrow, or falling, or similar thing, and causes displacement of the bone piece upwards, and it fills in as smoothly as blacksmiths when they pour into molds.
si entre li piere dedens.	 If between the stones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this happens more often to those with bones that are mostly moist, as in children's cases;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and occurs in all these ways of fractures where small pieces become dislodged like marbles;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And I will speak about it on site.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	All know the methods of fractures through pulling apart, and examination with tests, and by the corrupt bone that lies beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when the bone is discovered, and if it is rubbed hard underneath, an open black break occurs.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, beware in case of an accident with the patient; and if you see any malicious accidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding outwards and reddening, and other similar conditions, do not heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unstable injury with hope for healing, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the inflammation comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day you should remove the bone that you can reach.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bn before the seventh day so that the tissue around the bone becomes corrupted, and they come to the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone fracture reaches near the cloth covering the brain, then it is necessary that you split the affected part thusly;
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 and that you grasp the injured head with care, exposing all sides of the bone as much as possible, and gently uncover the wound area more delicately than you can, and if blood flow occurs during exposure, or pus appears, assist it with what is appropriate, and ensure that you fill the cavity with soaked linen in oil-soaked rose petals;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and ensure that blood flow resumes.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then begin working within the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of treatment:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 The first method involves cutting a narrow slit in front, and that is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second method involves having various cuts of different widths, some narrow and others wide, with points, made of specially crafted iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 and working lightly so as not to fracture the skull.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 And if the bone is thick and hard, it is necessary to pierce around it so that you make cuts with scrapers, not too deep into the skull or beyond the other test (presumably 'test' refers to a piece of equipment), which should have a margin or circle at the tip, so as not to go past the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 And you must have several tools if anyone comes in the place of the spine's bone, so that you have tongs for all examinations.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 and this is the form of three ways to use tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality for examining within the broken bone is to place one pair of tongs on the bone and rotate with both hands until you know that the bone is fractured.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 then move the tongs to another place shortly after, and thus do it throughout, then use the scalpel to create space in the bone where it is broken, making the cut more delicately than possible, gently, as we have said, until you feel the bone with your hand or any of the instruments that you have like pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 And ensure you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 And when you have pierced the bone and exposed it, and it is necessary to cut out the protrusion that has been left by the bone from any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be finer and more delicate than the other chisel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 And if there are no small bones or scales left, gently rub with any of the tools mentioned earlier.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 Then treat the wound as we have previously described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And another method of treatment is that which Galen describes, and it is more effective.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 and the remedy must be strong, as he said.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you open part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and when you have discovered that part, place atop its head a lens-shaped incision tool so that it takes this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And do not cut too deep, for it is an inflamed area on both sides, so that the one cutting towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 Then gently strike with a small mallet above it, so that you lightly chip the bone all around, and take care not to hit the surrounding tissue.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 If it is exposed to the bone, gently chip away at the bone carefully, because doing so without harm and with caution is of concern.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate all the way through to the skin, and the bone is cut mostly above it, leaving small pieces, then you must treat the inflammation, and have various subtle rasps from which you should extract scales in each place as deemed most appropriate according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are many coarse rasps followed by more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of these hair treatments and subtle fractures, it is necessary to align according to its direction.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 And this is something not properly restored by those who have studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the wound is severe, it's necessary to take a linen bandage according to the quantity of the wound, and soak in oil roseate (reddish oil), and place it on the w지디.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then take another cloth folded in two or three layers, and soak it with wine and oil mixed together, and place it over the first layer.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 And do this more gently than you can manage, so as not to burden the patient excessively, then administer it above the other layer without tightening too much until it only covers the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And leave it like this for one day or two, until the abscess is calmed down, then remove it and apply medicines as herbs of lilyroot, flour of cumin, powdered incense, aristolochia, among other things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And make a paste from these things and apply to the wound, then administer healing medicines without burning.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 Ensure the wound is clean and clear, do not leave any ointment or allow a boil to form, for when a boil forms on the cloth of the brain, it festers and pains the patient greatly.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 Because if you place something sharp on the skin, do not press down upon it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be cautious because if anything unfortunate occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if darkness does not come as a result of the medicine placed upon it, then you must mix one part honey and three parts rose oil in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then proceed with various treatments as needed until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Know that at no time are the two parts of the knee broken or separated, for they consist of only two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And those that are dislocated are cartilaginous, and do not break or snap, but rather hinge or twist, and then heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must splint your index finger or little toe with bandages on both sides, and align the fracture within your index finger and ankle inwardly until they regain their natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is in the part above the nose and it cannot be brought to its place, you should adjust it equal with a bit of a rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 And if it is a fracture of both parts, do as described above, and hurry to restore its position the first day if possible.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the seventh or latest day, when the swelling has calmed down, then bind to the top of the injured toe with linden cloth bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 When you bind another on the other side, if there is a fracture there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And be that they are swollen to such an extent that they fill up the nostrils with snot.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And a healer said that you must anoint the tendons with butter, and change it each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It seems to me not well enough, but it should be made into a mixture of egg whites and flour, and mill powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then let the swelling stay as long as the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And never put goose nose droppings in place of the swelling, and if to it a sheaf of hay is placed around, and keeps the fracture, and blows on the patient's face.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 Or do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then place a compress or cotton cloth in rose oil, or with a little bit of diachronic (ointment).
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And if abscesses do not arise, then apply plaster promptly, of wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg whites, then place it on light cotton wool, but do not tie the nostr grooves.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 If the break of the nose is small and it is broken into tiny pieces, extract as with suitable tools, then cut the fissure, and treat various difficult wounds and burns, and poultices and ointments appropriate for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If there is no internal injury to the nose, treat with bandages and apply linen soaked in broth until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	For fractures of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured but there is no open wound and the break is not too severe, as if it has been broken with a stick, you can see it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 and if the breakage is on the left jawbone, insert your index finger of the right hand, gently push inward, then adjust with the other hand accordingly and ensure it's level.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, it is necessary to arrange for an expansion by two parts so that they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 If there are movements of the teeth or bruxism, then they should be strained with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and apply cerate on the fractured jawbone, and place it under a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And place the great splint well made under it, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the jawbone, securely fastening it in all movements that may occur, instructing the patient to rest, and suggesting they consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the face changes, reset it every day, then restore what is changing back to its original state.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 and place plaster over it, with finely ground powder or meal of chickpeas after removing the cerate.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And place a light linen on the dislocation, and if the dislocated bone touches, do not change the patient's position until it is properly aligned.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 Often healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when an abscess comes, arrange it as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a break and wound together, ensure no piece of bone remains exposed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 If delicate in the vicinity where the swelling has settled near.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fat according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	their;
de la forcele	The strength of arms
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The shaft breaks many times at the shoulder, with breakage occurring in three different ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 When it is broken and displaced into two parts, and there are fragments, making it easier to repair.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 Or when the break also includes an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the procedures are as follows when the break with an open wound occurs: you must have two assistants, one of whom bandages the shoulder with the broken shaft.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and the other should extend their arm towards the affected area.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 Then position the break evenly against your own shoulders so that it is as necessary, ensuring there are no visible misalignments or discomforts.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you require further extension, place a round rod made of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, with its thickness according to necessity.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 Et ils sont étendus et livrés à leur force, et retenez-les dans votre main, de sorte que vous les positionniez correctement, comme cela se doit.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back due to it coming from the front, it is necessary for the patient to lie over their sling, and place under the shoulder .i. arm splint with a middle hole, and push in the ministers' hands downward until the shoulder bone is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 And then bring the break close to your hands, and if you see fragments, it is necessary that you split above.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 and grip the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any protrusion, provide support with one of your cutting instruments.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 but use this instrument to hold them apart to protect against infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 and make it resemble a spoon, not too deep, and as wide as needed according to the size of the bone and the strength of your hand.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 and it should have two ends, as you see, one end wide, the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you are sure of an abscess being hot, if the wound is large, or if you doubt a hot abscess, then cover the wound with linen and cloths, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes about, apply oil-soaked cloths, lint, and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The tension of a bone, when it is without wounds and not swollen, place plaster powder from the mill and whey butter on it, and put light bandages over that, and if necessary, use a splint underneath.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, then put two layers of linens over the bandages, and the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a delicate rod three palms in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, ensuring the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the stake over the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and below the healthy seat, and below the unhealthy seat.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And reset the joints of each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the break again, and it is clearly not moving above the broken bone, reward them every day, and once the bindings are loosened, they heal.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And make the sick person lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the seat while they sleep to elevate the shoulder.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 If you alleviate the fracture by adjusting the shoulder position or tying the arm to the neck, and no accidental dislocation occurs again until XX days. (XX here is a placeholder for an unspecified number of days)
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then begin the poultice again if it is needed, apply pressure and leave as such until restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And it is restored in at most 28 days, and sooner for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Regarding a broken shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 Occasionally the shoulder breaks or moves out of place without a fracture, and it cannot be moved except by touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 if the apparatus according to the pattern of the break, and resetting in accordance with its natural shape, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 then place on the location powder finely ground with plenty of eggs, and light gauze, and over it put a double layer.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 then place a wide and fine bandage, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if the edges of the bandage are beyond any part of the shoulder, use a linen gauze to secure it evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 And then it is tightly bound with a large bandage firmly, so that the joint does not move from its place, and monitor the ligament each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And every time it becomes less painful, re-bind it firmly, and place the joint even if it is displaced from its place, and lay the patient on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 and the shoulder has been restored in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when these numbers are completed, re-dislocate it gently and be sure, for it is not the bone that moves lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone is felt before and not near the skin, probe further, and expose the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed boil.
de la brisure dou pis	In the breaking of the thighbone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The flesh is never broken in a thousand ways, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 but it often breaks on the other side.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is fractured within a thousand pieces, if it falls from height, the patient feels great pain, numbness, and tingling, and at times blood is vomited, revealing exposed joints in the broken bones, and they are very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and places I cushions between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and aligns the ribs with both hands for II finger widths, subtly adjusting to all manners possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 Then place above the dislocated bones and stopgaps on the subtle salt stone or other light material, wrap it in a cloth, and keep it stationary so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 And turn the ligament back into place, strain it gently, and release each hour as needed, and if it becomes relaxed, then continue to strain.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 And if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain or pustule, do so promptly, and remove any splints, and attend to those who have come seeking treatments.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then reset the splint, and strain it until it is secure.
de la brisure des costes	The breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Surges that the fracture of ribs only occurs in large ones behind the back and within, and they do not bend easily because they are slick.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 and feel it well at the inquiry with both hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And healing involves setting the fracture correctly as needed.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply a cast, and use a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if the fracture of ribs is inwardly inclined, the patient feels very great pain and pressure, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the skin.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 and is filled with pus, and constantly vomits large amounts of blood, and it is severe illness, and the ancients put much effort into treatment.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it should be administerired meats that inflate the belly to push the fracture upwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not attempt this if there are no pus-filled abscesses present, unless they have already come about.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, proceed with the procedure.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And some say that you place cups on the body to draw out fluid, and it is reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 However, there is doubt whether the bleeding will not draw out excess at its place due to weakness in position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	;  the em (chief by:
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the bone protruding into the skin, and doubt arises for them, so it is necessary to cut at its place of broken ribs, and one must use an instrument to protect oneself from the wound.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then one must cut the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplasters until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And if boils arise from this condition, place a cloth soaked in oily rose oil on it and apply to the area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And care while the limb that must be incised is supported on its side until it becomes stable.
de la brisure dou col	Of the broken rib's bruising
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 No time there comes a fracture of the hip bone, and rarely does it happen to collapse;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 And also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this occurs with anyone, and you need to know if they will be healed or not, take care that if you see their hands become softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when pricked with a pin, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that they have signs of impending death in various conditions; if when restrained and not moved they feel well, then know the bone's connection is intact, and the patient will be healed with proper care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you need to know if it is stable or not, take care if the joints are softened, and if there are accidents present in both hands, and windwaters and involuntary stools occur on the back.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when it is stabilized on its belly, if there is involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when they are settled on their backs and they want to roll over, they cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Say that it is fatal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 If he does not work at his own care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this injury does not occur, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is that you apply soothing oil of rose or oil of sweet almonds until it is eased.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then place on one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind with a bandage, and command the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep over the part that is in pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bones are dislocated, one must cover them with a cloth;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat with an ointment-soaking poultice until healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the skull is fractured, known as "chiés de la kowe," place your poultice from your left hand and hold it level with your right hand at arm's length, then apply an embalming sponge and staff on top if needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Then stretch it, and if there is displaced bone, do so carefully, then set the bone, and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the fracture of the hipbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 Sometimes the hipbone is fractured, and if so, it has a slight shortening at the top.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 And they make a long cut, and descend to the breastbone, and come to pain at the location, and swelling, and break as if broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And its healing is such that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the fracture.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and assess which bone is broken and its shape.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 and if the fracture is solely in the skull, make it equal to that fracture until it assumes a natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it inclines towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that breakage is aligned properly.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have made it equal, place a staff underneath, then put a pillar of wood or iron, and stabilize the fracture so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 and raise from below the ribs until they are levelled.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy ribcage or backside.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 When an abscess appears, do not touch it until it is soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 Then return to restoration, and strain as necessary unless there has been any injury.
et c’est li maniere.	 And this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a shoulder joint fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 Dislocations are those that occur between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, they must be restored according to one of two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 One is to take a piece of iron wire long enough in this manner:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And make two loops with it, and bend them upwards, then secure the patient on the support.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then cast the broken arm on the rod so that it reaches the support, and in the middle, make an arch with another rod, then bend it over something heavy or extend the aid towards you.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then you must set the fracture as if together with its counterpart, until the break is restored as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one suspends the patient over his hatter, then ties his hands to his neck, and commands two ministers so that one dyes what is above the break in his hands, and the other dyes below with wool all around it, and stretches each part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then strain at the breakage below and above the breakage, and extend each of the limbs to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade, it should be bridged by placing one end under the collarbone and the other towards the armpit from the break.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 And similarly if the fracture is towards the armpit, you should place the splint gently without much effort, until the break is level with its location and above the collarbone.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then set the fracture as it should be, and splint it, if necessary abscesses do not occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if abscesses do occur, do not splint it until seven days have passed, and apply linen soaked in oil of roses for relief, until the abscesses are calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then you hold it in place, and the method of holding is such that you place the splint over the break, then join the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the back or over the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And apply the dressing, and hold it against the shoulder, and along the arm, so that the arm stays straight unless something prevents it or if a bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use splints and place one wider and stronger than the others over the fracture, with an interval of space between each splint, so that each splint should be large enough to extend beyond the break by three finger-widths from either side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then strain over the fragments as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more forcefully and less while aligning.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the position of the fragments and alignment, as we have said, during the hour when you restore the broken member, and you doubt the wound is hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then check each day for three days that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, or new sores cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If correctly executed as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if none of these incidents occur, do not discharge the bandage for more than three days or so, and let the patient lie on their back with hands on their abdomen.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 And place a bandage made of clean linen evenly on the shoulder, and observe each hour or part of the night, to ensure that the broken limb does not move or the ligaments become softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 If necessary by the power of medicine, and give him meat that we have previously prescribed, in such a way that the meat is as subtle first.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And when he begins to recover, it becomes larger (or substantial).
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be restored in forty days altogether.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 Then you must dislocate and administer baths and ointment remedies to set it right again.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is ugly and twisted, it remains to dislocate for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	Of a fractured arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm consists of two bones called "phalanges," one small and the other that forms the palm.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the other is large, and it is he who is outside, toward his small finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 Perhaps break only the large bone solely, or the small one; and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easy, and their healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when the large ones are broken, then there is bad healing, and more complicated than if they were both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it's only small fevers that have been broken, then a little rest is needed and one should be even-keeled.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if it's the large bone, then it must be removed with greater force;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And stretch it over the bone, and lengthen the pocket of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and cross them with him immediately, and hold the bone in front of him higher, that the patient may suffer no pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then extend the minister's arm towards the area below its hand or at the elbow, with one assistant on one side and another above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then place the mirror evenly, according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break to pieces, place each in its place, and if any are dislocated that they grip their root, and you cannot restore them to their place, then make a cut above and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And if there is an injury to the bone, I have discussed this individually with the physician.
si pren la cure.	 then take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And if in the beginning there are pus-filled blisters, make a poultice of a cloth soaked with a mixture of rose oil and white wax beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 and apply the poultice gently until the pus-filled blisters are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 And then remove the poultice and apply a plaster of powdered lime with abundant egg whites. When applying bandages, make them thicker and slightly wider than the others to stay on the fractured area more securely.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And you must understand there are six degrees or different arrangements of arms.
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 So it is broken in one bone, or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 And it is held more at the break than elsewhere, and every day less in alignment, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 And let the dressings be soft and moist over the break, not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And let the bandage used to hold it in place be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And repair the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon the limb, you must bathe the member in warm water until the itch is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And let the limb rest without any tightness.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the strapping, and if the ligament is softened and the bone displaced, and similar things occur, so shall it be done.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If care must be taken as the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it slightly and let some days pass until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then dislocate up until day XX.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 And between these times, then tie his hands to his neck, and let them be evenly matched, and guard against movement and displacement, and he sleeps on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or fifty, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the composition and temperament of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	Of a fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It happens that in the palm of the hand and in the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather a bending occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, it requires that the patient sit with their arms crossed evenly before them.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 Then place his hand above the extended thigh, and lengthen the broken bones with a straightening force, and align them evenly until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And apply the plaster and dressings, if there is an abscess, then he places a splint according to the amount needed.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And it is wrapped in a cloth of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if there is a break near the ribs around the belly of the sole, make a splint with cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken sole.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 and then the strain of a long cloth is applied, and let it be elevated as high as the palm's sole, and held in place as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the lower part of the limb, it must be placed with a stake underneath and another above on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap it entirely around the wrist, keeping the ligament between the bones taut.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if there is a break on any of our ankles, if it's the malleoli, place them equally as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 and strain with the sole, and if you see it then insert a small straight splint to elevate the breakage, and do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 If the fracture is of other bones, similarly to those in the index or one of the others, make it even and bind with the healthy bone that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Or you tie them all together tightly so they may move little or no movement, or place a splint underneath as needed.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And take care in the restoration and management of pus-filled abscesses, and remove what arises as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	For the fractured hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The bone of the hip is often fractured, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And its repair involves tying ligaments above the breakage, as well as other surrounding areas.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 The patient lies on their back, then each attendant extends their hand equally to all sides.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And when there is a fracture within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let one ligament go toward the wrist and the other ligament below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 And also if it's near the knee, then be the ligaments by the knee, and make the extension valgus.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then place the splint on the bone equal with both hands, so it follows its natural shape, and then apply the cast, and the bandage, if no swelling occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there is hot swelling, let it be soothed first then return to your work and care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The ligation is done in the following manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is necessary that you wrap above the fracture with doubled or triple bandages, and leave extra material, then turn the leg until the ankle reaches near the knee's root, and thread a long string between the thigh and leg, below the knee, let the top part of the cord hang over.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 Then turn to the leg and thigh, bandage them, then apply a dressing over any wounds, and place an iron bar on the leg bone.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 Then wrap the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to ensure even pressure, then begin binding using three or four turns around the wound.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 And as you increase above the wound, decrease the tightness.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 Then take two more strands of thread that you have tied between the leg and thigh, and bind three dressings on top of them, then return to untie at the head end of the thread as far as reaching the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 If it does not move back to its place, leave it like that, then ensure no abscess or swelling occurs again.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if it occurs, when resetting is done, and directed as described, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 And if there are broken bone fragments that catch, the repositioning may be required if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 and if it cannot be done, then incision of the limb must be made, and ligaments severed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 and the treatment is as we have said until it is sound again.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 And never should the thigh be broken as such when placed in splints, like in shoulders and arms.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 Nevertheless, in this kind of restoration done, it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored within a day or so, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the groove of the neck there is often a slight fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not so much a crack, but a split or piercing, and leads to any wound, feels of the wound, and this smells quite foul.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And if there is restoration by setting equally what was separated at its joints, so that it can be moved and healed.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then place the splint, and put a round peg if needed, and restrain it as necessary, then address all other issues we have mentioned regarding fractures, like abscesses that burn and similar matters.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do what is appropriate for each injury so that it heals properly.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one called "tibia" and the other called "femur".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 and there are all types of fractures as they occur in the arm, and therefore the treatment is like that for the arm equally, and the procedures are all there. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly.
et torne desoz.	 Yet then turn away from it.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then prepare for stretching, align properly, and secure the ligaments evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 but nonetheless, if it is an unsightly breakage with some fragments present, then the stretching should be minor and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 and keep upright according to your virtue (strength).
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take the weighted wooden staves that extend along the leg from knee to ankle on both sides.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 then wrap them with two strips of cloth above and below, securely tying the middle so that the leg cannot bend to either side, thus it is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And no one administers oil to the length of the leg, and it heals as wood, and places the leg in position to prevent movement, and properly treats the break where there is injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And each day moves the leg, to check if there are any abscesses or other accidents.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it heals until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	On the breakage of bone in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot it comes to a fracture and the bones are slightly dislocated, with no injury occurring in some other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if it occurs as a broken bone in the foot, and you see the bones protruding on top of each other, place such malaise limbs flat on the ground as if they were to walk, then now put your leg under theirs where the bones are elevated, and press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then place the poultice and apply pressure thereon, then take a small tablet at II inches from the navel, then strain it back in position immediately, then wrap with bandages around, and other things of which you are in need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones to be equal again, whether fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if any nerves are broken, restore them as we have described for the hand's nerves.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 then place an iron bar of the same length as the nerve, and make it slightly wider, then take that tablet from under the hip as I mentioned, and strain back immediately.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 and if there are two or three, or more broken, place under each a bar according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of flax, and strain the tablet from under the hip.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And it is when on top of the shoulder blade lies the belly with a feverish pain, so that one may grasp firmly.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And it is necessary not to forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, which we have mentioned;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 and treat each injury as it ought to be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For a fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the bone of womanly nature is broken, and she should sit in a chair expanded, then incline it to the part of her back that hurts, and be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 then fill the maiden's body with cotton cloth, placing as much as it can hold.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, and thus remove the cotton when it comes to the entrance of her body, returning the bone with its natural position.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she wishes to urinate, provide her with a sponge, and once she has urinated, reset it, thus doing so for seven days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 If this is restored, and if you see it, take a sheepskin bladder, tie its neck with thread, and fill the entire bladder with water from the stream.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then blow into the bladder until it is fully inflated.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 The body will return to restore the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then it should be filled with cotton and left that way for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the bone of the arm or woman's limb is broken as we have described in the thigh bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And these fractures are not hidden from those who devote themselves to its study and application; listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For a fracture indicates various conditions affecting the proper path of restoration:
enten le donques.	 So understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In the phallus, when it is broken, takes on a goose's neck and inserts itself.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap dressings around it, and leave them there for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be healed now so that the signs we have mentioned testify to them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed and there are no foreign bodies present, then again begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	When abscesses occur there, allow the healing until the third day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch or disturb it either on the second or fourth day, for you would bring about a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible at its location, it must be carefully set with slight pressure from your hands in small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the extension does not fit to make both hands equal, then use this instrument made of iron with seven or eight long pieces, and its width is according to the amount of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 and so it requires three or four fingers from the barber to grasp, depending on how much is needed for each treatment of fractures.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 and it should be slightly long and somewhat thicker, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and have an edge in front, and thickness towards the middle like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palisandre," so that the arching of the neck must be placed on the visible part of the bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And you must touch it once so that it returns, and they are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fractures are subtle, and the tissues cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must cut off the visible part of the baboon until the tissues have opportunity.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, use a suitable instrument for this, either an incision or a saw, to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 then retrieve what is lodged in the hard bone with sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned to its place, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 If you manage to place it back where it belongs, then anoint the wound with vinegar and black sticking tonic properly if so.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 and do not put any cerate or other substance on the wound that contains oil, lest it causes decay and infection.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 then apply bandages as you have restored the bebone, and leave the wound uncovered, covering it entirely with a dressing according to the amount of the wound, ensuring that the injury is not strained with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have they done this foolish physician, bringing forth from the patient who is dead or corrupted at some point.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 And let it be that he makes the fracture more gentle and softer than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that some unforeseen event may occur, as we have said, and there is pain at the site, then it does not require setting with splints.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 but wrap around it, in place of splints, use sturdy cloths and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when after one or two days you see infection at the wound, take whatever you have applied and add healing salve to it, as with Tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to loosen the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be set in such a way that the bow bends gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If more than one day passes and it cannot be joined but returns with pain, because there are small pieces of bone in the way, then you must carefully cleanse the wound and remove all those displaced fragments that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula comes at the site or another form of decay occurs, it must be treated as described in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and visible above the limb, as with the hip or shoulder bones, and other similar large body parts, do not treat it, for many times death comes, but let it remain until it heals.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 By chance it may heal itself after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound, if you know how.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 and if you do not know, leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruises that appear around the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 We often come to heal the break after bone health, especially when it is near the joint, and there is an unsightly appearance of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Therefore be cautious if we are weakened:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 if you administer medicines like aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with acacia and other similar substances, whether you use any of these individually or all together, mix them with astringent wine or an abundance of honey or oil.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And place them on the knives for cutting, and hold firmly without loosening hands.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 Then dislocate it, and do another one, as long as necessary movements occur.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 or strain a well-made lump of flesh;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 because the properties of this flesh are such that it pulls out all inflammations from over the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 and if the movement is already converted into hardness just like a stone, and there is a need to remove it, so remove excess flesh.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 or reshape by any razor until it is removed, and heal as long as it is cleaned up.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The member that is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the broken bone is restored, and after follows weak and subtle limbs for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 Because one was made too tightly, and it was not loosened as it should be.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 Or because there were too many bindings, preventing the member from regaining its normal size.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 Or due to excessive rubbing.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 Or by making movements that are too large and not at the right time.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the treatment should be that you feed the patient well and make the body supple until there is an increase in blood.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 And provide him with a bath, and give him joy and ease.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 Then apply poultices to the limb such that they draw much swelling away from it and often change with water, until the swelling subsides in the limb.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The twisted member after health is restored
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb is ugly, however, it does not lose its natural function.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 if you do not believe the simpletons who say that one must break the limb anew entirely, and many foolish men have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 and such actions are condemned, which brings great harm, and sometimes death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 however, if the knots and twists are recent, it is appropriate that they be loosened with warm water, or soft herbs boiled like valerian leaves, roots, and milk thistle, among similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 And the poultice softening agent you take as Aquilon properly made, and you collect the mucilage of wormwood, and mix it with fat of geese or oil of sesame, and make a poultice on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 Or you take soothing fats, and grind them with columbine seed, and certain medicines that alleviate the tightness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 At no time is bone broken by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And so provide relief to the movement of each limb at every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And if the tortuousness is old and hardened, just like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then if necessary, use the saw-like instrument gently up to the bone.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And apply cuisson and continue with treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint is out of its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When any dislocation occurs, now you must return it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 Because if one is late, the swelling increases, and perhaps when resetting it causes pain at its place.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 For this reason, it is not advisable to move it when it has swelled.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 Many times brings forth pain and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 Nevertheless, when this occurs, make the patient take wine, then leave them alone until the swelling is calmed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently flex it, and treat each member as care comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder joint dislocations up to fractures.
des mandibules	Of lower jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated inwardly, and there are two ways of dislocation for both sides.
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they are a little out of their place, and become slightly softened;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 or they are dislocated entirely, hanging towards the left, and causing saliva from the mouth that cannot be held, not able to close its mouth, and wrapping around the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 If it is complete and accomplished, one must promptly reset it without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 In such a way that the minister dyes your head with the patient's hand and inserts the mirror slightly into one of its roots at the location of the lower jaw's dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is on both sides.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And let the other two hands be far enough to place them evenly.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 Then instruct the patient to soften his jawbones and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The mirror is placed to make it level, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And if resetting is difficult, especially when both jawbones are together, apply hot water and oil until they can be gently adjusted.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not attempt to move it back as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are returned evenly, and the wound of the patient heals well and becomes softened, then place a cloth soaked in a mixture made of rose oil and wax on it, and lightly bind it with thin threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 the patient should sleep on his back with his head between two pillows, and not move to either side or make any effort to turn over, but gently eat tender meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws have healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 and then offer him what he wishes to eat lightly, and not strain to open his mouth while eating or drinking until the jaw is fully healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two lower jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not restored to their original positions, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal obstruction, and perhaps they vomit clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this, then you know it is dislocation.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times the one who suffers from it can die within 9 days.
de la forcelle	of the sinew.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strong bone cannot be dislocated from within the ribs and at the end of the shinbone, and it is not dislocated even once by accident, but one feels it keenly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 then you press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 then place on the splint and apply the bandage, securing it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 and the one lying towards the edge cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 if not, and if it ever does dislocate again, reset it to its place as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then apply the splint and bandage, secure it, and advise the patient to rest until they are well again.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And thus bring back the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Sections that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 One is because it dislocates from the lower part of the shoulder to above.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 and the second is at the upper part.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 And sometimes dislocates to the upper part, but this happens little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 and does not dislocate backward for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inward for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 and often dislocates upward toward the collarbone, especially in those with little strength, for these it moves very quickly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 to those with enough strength, it goes with ease and reenters easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally some men may experience blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with intense heat, believing it to be dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Thus one must try it, as long as you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	 and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 And is known when dislocation occurs toward the collarbone, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their marked diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and underneath the socket where the top of the shoulder meets, just as if it were some eggs.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 And the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor make any movements at all;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see the socket.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 This way of dislocation cannot be corrected if it is new, or when the child becomes ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 And the method is for the minister to raise the patient's hand upward, then put pebbles underne cuff, and lift the joint with great strength at its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the minister takes hold of the hand, extends it upward, then places it below.
si venra hastanment.	 If done swiftly and skillfully.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not occur as we have said on the following day, it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 and treat gently with soothing substances such as an infusion of wormwood, fennel, and honey in water, and be treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 then rest the patient on their back, and place under the buttocks a strip of linen that is neither too soft nor too hard, then position the ankle bone on top of the strip, and carefully elevate the head of the shoulder, and treat the hand gently.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And other remedies apply to the patient's head so it does not move forward.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 and if that shoulder returns immediately, then examine whether you reset according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 And ensure that there is a person who is larger than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 And stand directly to their side, and lift the shoulder from under the seat of the patient, raising the seat upward so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And other remedeus guide the patient's hand towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too light, reinforce with them something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And reset in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 And it is that you insert a long stick into the ground so that the head is aligned as with an axis, and not too thick nor too narrow.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 Then it is put under the patient, but with soft cloths above, and the patient lies long on their back.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 Then the hand should be extended downwards to the other side gently, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if it does not want to return for all these reasons that we have mentioned, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take an iron stick of length five and two inches in width, which has the head bent to enter into the elbow from above, as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then put soft cloths over the back of the patient, so that the elbow does not scratch the patient, then place it under the joint of the affected limb.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 Extend the other arm over the length of the back, and place the shoulder over it, then extend the head of the hand, and put the arm under the slot of a stool with wide arms, and let the hands hang downwards on the opposite side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The joint may now remain fixed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put a woolen thread beneath the shoulder, then apply an ointment cloth of powder from grinding, with incense and myrrh oil on all around the shoulder, then quickly strain undernehemenent, and turn the linen over the ointment, wrapping it around its collar, and let the hands hang in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it is necessary that he rests a little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal sooner.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then rest more after 3 or 7 days, and move [it].
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 and if it is firm and not softened, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the dislocation is severe due to the moisture that has occurred or another reason, it must be tended with three small fire cauteries as mentioned in the treatise of fire cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after nine days, and the joint does not stay in place, nor can lift either arm upwards; then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are pinched or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that occurs towards the lower part and scapulae, or backward, is caused by impact, extension of the hands, and other measures are taken.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat until it is whole again.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes weakness in the limb and delays in movement, causing the patient great pain many times until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Know that the shoulder joint has dislocated from its place and returns to points;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And it is dislocated in all parts, mainly at the front and back, and the dislocation cannot be reduced, as one can clearly see and feel it.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 and dislocates according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the maligned limb with its proper alignment, if it can be seen clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 Because the dislocation is raised, and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And it is necessary for you to reset it as soon as a bone protrudes because if the bone were to emerge, it would be difficult to realign.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 and perhaps cannot always be realigned completely, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 it's worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and perhaps there may be death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And restoration is when it can be returned to such extent that you spread its hand with your two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and its arms are spread wide, and the hands turn as follows throughout it, above and below, positioning the joint with all of its fingers together or at the root of its palm, until they return to their place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back after doubling its hand with its own hand and fixing the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not want to go back to its place, give a strong stretching.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and there are two ministers who extend the arm, and they hold it with both hands, so that it does not move during stretching.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 When the muscle attaches to the joint near its hand, if you anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then rejoin the joint properly until it heals.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when it is in place, if you securely wrap with linen bandages and strain gently, then support the arm at the ache-ridden joint, leave it for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firm in place, you may loosen the ligaments and let them be.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, start anew with bandaging and ligaments, leave them for several days until they are firmly in place.
puis le deslie.	 Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if it feels stiffness after the joint's resetting and moves, then bathe well and rub gently, pressing until relieved.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 Or place a fat sheep's grease on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then bandage, and let them take their bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when they sweat, rub the joint promptly, then reapply the fat, and then take a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this two or three times until healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 And if you see swelling, apply warm damp fenugreek paste mixed with butter and bind it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 If it returns to normal condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The hand's joint dislocates easily, and its return is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 Nevertheless, it must be brought back to its place promptly, at the same time as it is dislocated, so that the joint can swell or an abscess may arise there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the adjustments are such that you place your hand over a table, extend your fingers, and align them evenly, so that you put your palm on the joint's surface, and press until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Nevertheless, it is necessary to check if it is properly in place.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then the patient should put their back on their hand over a table during extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a tabletop and mirror position your hand over that joint appearance.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, that is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, and the strain from soothing balms causes an abscess, then let it be as such to begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if it cannot bear being left off, and you are unable to place it back after any days, the twisted joint will persist.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 nor can anything be done for the patient until their hand has become softened and cannot grasp or extract any objects at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 then you know that the nerves are cut or the artery is affected.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 if there is no other remedy but to extract through surgery near the wound, and perhaps it brings no further benefit.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are placed correctly, place them on the plaque we have mentioned, then grasp it and leave for 5 days, then release and keep like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no loosening, then apply warm water to the area, and rub until it becomes smooth.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 Never are either of the bones of the hand dislocated to any side, neither towards the back of the palm nor its underside.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 Then they are to be tied up and the dislocation is put back into place until it stays, then support the head of the shoulder, and bend towards the part where it was dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 And leave it for two days, then on the third day make it equal again.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 and from this nourish him as we have said, leave him for a day, then make him move again, and reconnect the nourishment.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this often until it is narrow again, just the same, if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, then proceed as you did before, until it becomes healthy.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do likewise when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Double dislocation of the spine or backbone.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several occurring, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the signs are that the urination gushes out without volition, cannot be held in, and many times some limb is weakened, either both hips or one arm or leg.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And many times the spine dislocates four parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 The one that moves at the back is called "gilborsis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 This treatment is for when you find "gilborsis" resulting from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 If there's no remedy or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And the one that comes from falling or blows or similar things, according to old methods of treatment by using many words, it does not have much benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 But I've abbreviated according to my intention and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the "gilborsis" occurring at the front of the thighs, there is no cure or health.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 And similarly those that come directly to both sides, and cannot be healed except for the one properly coming onto the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 And that the patient be stretched equally across his face in one place, and have support from below him, so he does not fall.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 Then stick a splint to the head in earth firmly, and one at the feet, and tie a bandage around the limbs of the patient, and another on the hips, knees, ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 And two ministers know the bindings, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the two splints.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 And they should be securely closed, as we have said about the splint, and the healer place his palms firmly on the spine, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 If it does not return with this treatment, take a stick three arms long, and chevron from the front, position the patient on their side, then place the head of the stick under the forehead, and then set the middle of the stick against the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And place the ends of their feet under the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see that twists toward the elbow, apply pressure with your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And take two sticks of great length to the head of the patient's arm and toward the other two fingers, placing between each stick an ample space in width.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And have on each stick one knot where it bends correctly, and the sticks should be firmly in place so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And among these burners should there be one burning piece returning to where the ribbons return, and have in it two smaller pieces of the width of a palm, for turning the wheel.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then attach the ribbons that are among the cables to the wheel's axis and the other ribbons to the pieces on the opposite wheel, with each servant turning their respective wheels throughout the entire length of the ribbon, and the master ensures the spine is aligned as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is aligned, place on an embalming desiccant with plenty of ointment, then the plugs, and then the splint from a tablet three fingers wide to properly fix the fracture site and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with ribbons as we have said, and apply subtle nourishment to the patient until they are well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And if any issue arises at the end of health recovery, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the spoon that we have mentioned here before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And never administer a piece of metal or iron, and when the appearance appears in the lower part of the back, believe that it is dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 And it is the bone that opens up, so there should be no assumption about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 Perhaps death could come as a result.
des dislocations de la hainche	Des dislocations du genou
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 I say that the hip and shoulder joints only come from dislocation alone, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 Outward and inward, front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 And further inside and out thereof, with it dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the recognition of its dislocation inwardly is such that when joining the affected limb with the healthy one, it is longer and opens more joints on the diseased side than the healthy, so the afflicted cannot double their knuckles over fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the sinew which is near an inflamed abscess, because the head of the hip comes close to it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	The sign of it occurring to one is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the signs in those for whom this occurs anteriorly are that they extend their leg according to completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 However, do not double the knuckles without pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, cannot go forward, retains its urine, swells with anger, and as it goes, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of it occurring to one is that they can spread their knee should be loosed from above and weakens, and is the other leg, and are the shoe.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The resetting of this type of dislocation is such that you must first assess if the dislocation occurred recently, and it remains according to its nature, without any remedy.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 and it should not be assumed unless necessary.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh and there are four ways of dislocation, quickly return the joint to its place, extend it outward and inward, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 perhaps if it returns, no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this way, you must summon a strong assistant and firmly support the leg with two hands or with one hand under the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 And other ministering hands extend over in such a manner that they put their hands below their knees, then grip them with a soft cord around the thigh.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and others pinch the head of the ligament.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 they extend both upward and downward at once so that the patient is lifted from the ground entirely, and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four similar cases; and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, then it must be given similar treatment.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is in the jawbone, it is appropriate to support the patient on their uninjured side, then place a cord at the base of the thigh, and extend it from under the arch, towards the foreleg, and upwards towards the neck.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then call upon other ministers with your arms, and hug the large joint of the ailing thigh, and extend it in the direction needed.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 If it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 And this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then you must bind both feet of the ailing limb together with a strong but supple bandage over both heels and knees, and let the sick leg be extended two degrees more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 Then hang from the top of a log, with two long arms outstretched on either side of it;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Then command one minister to hug the head of the thigh, and let other ministers hang with the sick person, who firmly grasp the thigh, as the joint returns swiftly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 When the dislocation is on its way back, place it in front of the patient, as we have said in those with gilbosity, and properly straighten the limb above the leg.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then put two sticks, one on top of the head and the other under it, then place a stick between the buttocks near the form above the patient.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And have him wear wet cloths around, so he does not shake the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the master places it evenly with his hand to reset the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, then place on a board and press as we have said for the gilbosity, positioning the patient's bad side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended quickly for the affected leg, and according to what I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 Then the master places his hand above the patient's pain, then presses with the other hand and extends towards their navel.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 If the dislocation is in its place, do not extend or lift the patient upwards, but let it be as if the joint was dislocated backwards, as we have described during lying down on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And let it be propped up so that the limb is extended as we have said before, and one should apply pressure on the joint against the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And when the patient extends their legs, they will be equal in length.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Then support the hips and place the traction, and tie it with a bandage so that the joint does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 And let it rest for three or four days, then release the traction, and place the traction again underneath.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 And if you see that they are equal, strain them as before, and let it rest for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then release it, and the wound heal completely, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	For the dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The joints are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 That is to say, anteriorly and posteriorly, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	 And does not dislocate again immediately.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, extend his leg if he can, and then place your back to his face and put your feet under his.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 Then take his knee in your hands, retract it between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the kneecap.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 And other methods extend his foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it fits lightly into his thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 And apply the bandage over it, and raise the leg to the hip, keeping them together firmly for three to four days or five, then release.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And do not allow the patient to move much during healing until the limb is comfortably settled.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not severely damaged, it must be carefully and strongly treated, as we have said in the treatment of the arm, until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	For ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is never completely healed or fully dislocated, but both within and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 The signs are such that the ankle is everted, and try before reaching the part where it has dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The reductions should be gentle, and he must be extended slightly by his hands as soon as possible.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when it is fully dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and grip him with one hand through his leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then grasp the foot towards your right hand and then two times with the left, then extend it upward, and gently place the foot back into position.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this twice as we have said, pulling and turning the limb.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it returns, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 If not, resume the work, as it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 And if it cannot return thusly, lay the patient on their back on the ground, and firmly insert a staff between their thighs in the earth, and wrap a cloth around them so they do not move.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 Then mark the thigh with a minister, and other ministers extend the limb to their hands or chains, so it is tied at the neck of the limb.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 Then extend each minister equally, and the staff should be firmly between the thighs of the patient to restrain them when extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then set the mirror to properly align the dislocation with your hands, and other remedies apply oil to the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it reaches the point where bones heal, place the poultice and apply plaster above, bind firmly, tie the bandage to the leg, and be careful not to make the lines too tight around the tendons behind the ankle.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 Then leave it for two or three days, and loosen the bandages if necessary, reapply them.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Then release at the fourth day or halfway point, and instruct the patient to walk for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if it passes this timeframe, there is no need to be concerned that it may still dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to this place, it is necessary that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	From the dislocation of both shoulders
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, they should be extended with ease, which is a simple thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it must be made to sit on something flat or a table straight, and place your foot under where these joints open, then firmly press with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when it is evened and nothing opens up, place a board with two legs under the foot, then press firmly, and leave it there for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with the dislocation and we want to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 If you are not overly confident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassaderies and merciful but late, then do not be too bold:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 And at the beginning of healing abscesses cut hot, and let the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place now so that the abscess heals inwardly.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is reset, apply soothing remedies for abscesses and treat the wound as needed with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And if there is dislocation with bone fractures and small nerves disturbed, as for simple illnesses do what we have said.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And beware of falling into despair, as I have said, for it benefits your soul and the health of your armament and body.
