O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science volume, and have made it whole through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And to me has come in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands - namely, "Surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is taught in our region and practiced entirely, it has been overshadowed by science and knowledge, with only minor details remaining from ancient texts that describe actions performed on limbs.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus comes about the error and folly, closing off understanding and separating knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 Or it seems to me that I will revive them together with the direction of this treatise according to the way of exposure and explanation and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I will come together with the forms of cauldrons and other tools of surgery, along with the arrangement for explanation and preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	to tc;s s ...
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And so Hippocrates says that without it there is not much, and with surgery there is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	 Also particularly in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with the aforementioned things must be careful so as to not err and kill people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 So I have seen many times how some who engage in this science abandon themselves to theory and lack experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 For I have seen a crazy barber who cut an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and severed the arteries at the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 Because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another barber who treated a stone of a man's eye, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 thus it took away with him a piece of the bladder, and within three days the man died.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the severity of the wound, and if it were not for treating it, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another barber who took in care our duke who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was an injury.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the ignorant barber pulled out the fracture near to the wound with great force, did not allow any bandage on the wound, and left it like this for so long.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And he commands that it not be dislocated again;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 and remains so, causing the leg to become completely swollen and the foot leading to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I am summoned to come to him, and have been hurriedly dislocated from his leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 and when it is dislocated again, he feels no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But in any case, the contamination had already set in or limb, and could not be cured;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 and the corruption did not stop spreading through the member until the whole limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there was another physician who collapsed an abscess and it became infected, then inflamed due to the spite of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	and: the first.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And therefore, dear sons, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 That is to say, where there is danger in various disorders;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 Therefore, you must be vigilant so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 If you take up your weapons in consideration and undertake your maladies lightly yet firmly, and follow the best course with God's grace to attain salvation and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 and let go of hopeful diseases causing great suffering in health.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And arm yourselves with this so that you may not doubt, and be ready in such a way that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galien states in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take careless illnesses into treatment, lest you be called mad master.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treaty according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapters are of fire cautery and medicinal cupping, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 And of exudations, and iron cauteries, and all that is necessary in work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and arrow extractions, and such like things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 And it is about ordered chapters and forms of inflammations.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about correcting dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And it is organized up to the head, and forms of inflammations.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So we remember this work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of aid and harm from each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the quality of help, and harm done, is a longer speech and subtle art and secret remedies.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 and about this spoke many wise men, and agreed on it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 and I am not satisfied with their words because I repeat the lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cautery helps everywhere for any constitution or matter it has, whether there are conditions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 That is to say, hot temperament with moist matter, and dry temperament with dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In hot and dry constitutions combined with certain matters, some advise that fire cautery is greatly helpful.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 That fire cautery does not help diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases caused by heat or dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 And those who say the opposite believe that fire cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the person and their moisture to its constitution with heat, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree upon this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	ouest douce la cuire the luist les plaies. Et quant tu ne soigné, et les tires in its froid gues-le chaude of heat it est curet is à chaud déguises de a le croix coupeur temps let: Car tu; and l’ai ou la partis d’est douce or li cuise au teste.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And so, let no one meddle in it who has not tried and understood the art of cautery over a long period, and knows the different temperaments of people, their dispositions and causes of diseases, outcomes, and duration.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 We do not have fear of other conditions, particularly cold and damp diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my children, that fire-cautery is a secret of healing and more generous than caustic medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	The fire is simple, and does not come from force except to the limb that is cooked, and harms no other limb unless it has a name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 Ardent medications come from one member joining another, causing the affected limb to develop serious healing diseases;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And sometimes it kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The heat due to its intensity and for the kindness of its nature does not occur without excess if there is no surplus.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And this I have found through experiments and the long service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 And because of the length of my words, I excuse myself so that I may reveal to you the secret hidden in fire and the quality of its workmanship on how it counteracts diseases of the body as the philosopher explains by demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Or receive them in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they are agreed upon when to be made the fire cauteries, and choosing prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that cauldration is appropriate at all times because the harm that occurs can be prevented by the aid of cauldration.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 and especially when cauldrations are needed urgently and quickly, so that they cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And never think as fools do.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 because the disease that is treated by cauldration has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	 and it speaks thusly.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 but it is not as they claim because cauldration is a medicine that changes the temperament and dries up the humors causing pain; its value lies in moving quickly and in the virtue of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And it is possible that illness comes at any time according to the constitution of the individual and the nature and virtue of the disease.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 And they are accumulated in him due to the consumption of meats and such things, unless there have been caustics administered on site where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar matters, so that no great pain returns.
mais ce avient poc.	 But this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and that is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 But they do not believe that caustics are worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false; caustics are the last of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they are ineffective, then we apply our caustics, which work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then indeed, fire cautery is the last of medicines, not according to the misguided beliefs of fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that cauterization with a tool of gold is more effective than iron, and they did not consider copper because of the quality of gold and the high value of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 And they said that the application of cauterization does not cause itching, but this is not true as I have tested and found that it happens in some individuals.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 and gold tools are more valuable than iron ones, just as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And nevertheless, when you heat the instrument made of gold, it is not because of the color of the gold, and cools down quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if heated too much;
si font au feu;	 If done with fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And thus there is sufficient hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we employ fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And I have ordered this chapter from the main points up until now so that the journey may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil is often used in medieval medical treatments for its supposed healing properties, though it should be noted that many of these beliefs were not based on our modern understanding of medicine and science. It was sometimes applied externally as a salve or ointment to wounds or afflictions such as skin conditions, believed to have soothing effects due to the oil's moisturizing properties.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These fire cauteries are effective for moisture and cold on the brain, and among them there is a sweet way to treat an illness called 'soda,' as well as due to various humors descending into the ears, and causing numerous dreams and toothache pain, throat pain, and primarily for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solutive medicine altering the chief III or IV, depending on what its virtues and effects and the condition of the ill person can tolerate.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 And then raise the head of the sick person.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 Then make them sit with their crossed hands and place their hands under some small stones.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 After that, put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 and there you will take your two means, so bleed him afterward and then apply the caustic called "olivari" of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And you place it on a piece of parchment with ink, and make it by drawing and slowly stretching your hand bit by bit while turning.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then lift your hand slightly, and return the joint as soon as you see the bone has moved a little;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 And if you do not see it, resume the fire treatment until you observe the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 Then take a bit of wool, and place soft, moist cotton inside, and put it on the joint, and leave for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 After placing soft butter-covered cloth over it;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 And leave until the burn is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After caring for the wound with anointment called 'tetrapharmakon' until it is sound.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And when they are said by the ancients, that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purifies.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and so he may move again.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should not overuse the cautery if part of the bone is burnt; and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And they say that the caustery should be placed lengthwise, and pushed so hard that it widens like a wreath women put in their hair to expel the fluids.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and one must keep the wound openly exposed for an extended period.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 Afterward, cleanse and dry it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of caustery do not seem to me entirely good for everyone, except in some men who have cause for fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and it seems to me that I should leave them.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 because the head becomes weakened by continuous natural draugnces, as we testify in other limbs.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 and similarly when the head of an ill person is weak by nature, and the first sign of caustery seems more healing and restorative to me, and thus I do this work for health in kind.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Regarding the pain from an open wound
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When there is chronic pain throughout the body that persists for a long time, one must use herbs and pills called "cachet," along with enemas of wine and oil ointments.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 And if the fire cautery is performed as we have mentioned before, it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Be aware that the patient's shoulder is of a strong nature, and should not be too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then one must perform the fire cautery slightly as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After performing the fire cautery on each horn of the shoulder up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform the fire cautery at that spot which is called "vaseline.";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 And it is where one applies cups;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 and lift your hand so that you do not see to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 the patient feels much more pain in this cauterization than others, and I will speak elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 it is necessary that the cauters of horns be more delicate than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is how they are made.
dou cautere dou chief	For both fire cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends to the joints, and the head is purged by dissolving medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the classification of diseases are done, none of it helps.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then you must make cauterizations according to two methods: one with ague medicine and the other with pitch.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The medical cautery for ague requires you to pluck a hair of straw and remove the bark and paste as little as possible from around the head, then treat the temple in such a way that you can replace the straw on the leather.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 And when it is replaced, if bound and strapped tightly, let it remain so for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 Then remove the binding and treat the wound in this manner for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 Then place a piece of cloth soaked in butter until it becomes thoroughly permeated;
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the ointment treatment, when it is sufficiently healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you wish to use any burning remedies that I have written or mentioned, treat with combustible medicines;
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is made in such a manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the shape of which here is the cauldron:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And it is called "close" because the head is shaped like a bell or has little arching; and in the middle there is a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 And it must be placed back in its rightful position, and hold your hand and gently twist the fire a little, until the joints are as white as cream.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And release your hand so that the vein does not burn further backward and flows abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 After placing gauze on the wound, keep it in place for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then you apply softened lard to the area, and then treat the head with ointment until it is healthy.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the tool called 'culatelle', at the very tip, and be careful not to burn the vein in this area that is not ancient.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When treating migraines as we have previously discussed in divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the fire cautery mentioned earlier is unsuitable for medicine and iron doe not suffice, then it should be heated with a device called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 And gently place it on the aching limb for half an inch and a half long, then remove your hand once, and hold so that you do not cover the artery and until reaching the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And beware of the jaw moving when chewing, and that the nerves look only at movement and spasms do not come to harm, and watch for bleeding from the artery once it is covered, or if there's a clotting frighteningly large and also for those who do not know it, and are unstudied and inexperienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 Let the work be as I teach;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is severed, and I will show you there where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that these cauldrons do not relieve the disease at all, and the patient is suffering greatly, apply them within as we have said in the head, and heal the wound until it is clean.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 and if you see, apply the cauldron that we have described or for artery extraction in the book, with the cauldron having two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 and this cauldron is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from coldness, and one has used soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not subside, then warm this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After pointing all around the patient's ear where both sides hold pain, and move it slightly up from the base of the ear after removing the plug. 
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 et it has X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing, let the limb be until it is sound.
de la torture de la bouche	For the treatment of mouth wounds.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 The torture that must be treated by cautery does not include those caused by moist movement, as we have described in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 and do not make a caustic for similars that come from hardness and tension of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When treating this similitude of torture which moves from moisture of worms and purging of the head and gargling, if it does not work, then you must causticize the patient with three cauldrons:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 one at the root of the ear, and the other a bit behind the temple, and the third between the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 And place the caulter on the part that is sound, and make a caution mark at the top of the ear just above a small bit from the tip of the horn in the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 And leave the caulter until half the hair is burned off.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is the shape of the caulter:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And here is the form of the scalpel that we have described before it, but it is slightly more delicate and the knife should be a bit larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing them as I've previously explained, until they are healthy again.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four caulters:.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 On the two horns of the head and in the neck, and at the place called "ears", as we have previously mentioned, and then fire cautery on the stomach's mouth.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pills to cleanse the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 After raising the patient's head completely, and placing on the occiput the astrolabe of anise which is written about in treatises on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 And this is how to do the fire cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If it goes as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If he remains so, well done;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if not, he should do three fire cauteries between the neck and the clavicle, each separated by one hand's width.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 And the treatment as with others, and if you see it repositioned, and the patient is suffering, then perform a fire cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if surgery is necessary, on the other side near the two corners, treat until it heals properly;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 and be the fire cautery called "olivare", as I have mentioned before.
de la froidor dou chief	From coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and as we have previously said;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After resting the head on the patient, then perform fire cautery in the middle of the head and each corner, and behind and three times along the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 and if you need more treatment, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four fire cauteries along the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 And he leaves until it is more than white, and raises your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After the cure when it becomes healthy again, and let there be the olive-shaped caustics that we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	On epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cool the brain with ice and other treatments we have mentioned in the division when the patient is greatly suffering and enduring hardships of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it is a child who cannot bear it, let them have a gargle and chew with meats that purify the brain often.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After placing his head in milk, and the cautery is applied as we have said before, and on the vessels.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if the patient is beyond help and suffering, let them have cautery as I have told those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and be olive-shaped caustics as I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child with these symptoms, they undergo a subtle fire cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moistures and heavy phlegm, then one should perform the kind of caustic cautery as we have told for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy there are declining excesses towards melancholy, and the body is ill-humored and moist, then give it something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what it is before in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After reducing the head of the patient
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 After finishing the good turn for the patient, just as with a circle, place it within the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and have the patient cross their arms, ensuring they are held firmly on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 after applying the ointment, ensure it is thoroughly worked in with butter from old sheep.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 and warm the cloth on fire promptly, so that if needed, the patient may quickly wrap themselves for relief.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 after removing the circle from inside the head, let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and do this to each patient once a week with another good regimen until they are well again.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see to cauterize it by making multiple points throughout the entire caulder.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This manner of cauterization moistens the brain evenly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 And then apply cotton soaked in oil and fat of geese.
de l’awe des eulz	From underneath the eyes.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the pain first comes as described in the divisions, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protects from all dampness, making them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomamen't venu plusors par l’ivreement des eulz
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 Afterward, instruct him to turn his head back, and make a fire cautery in the middle of his head, and make two fire cauteries on both temples where the humors gather together, or one by one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 and cover the entire fire cautery with all veins and arteries that are close to the crown, and make the fire cautery long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 and beware of blood loss, and if too much blood is seen flowing out, then staunch it with the power you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you in extracting arteries and making an incision how to staunch it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 At no time is a caustic or incision made behind the two bones backward.
dou cors des larmes	In the body's tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and located near the veins or close to the arteries that appear before the forehead.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 and it is seen that they are cold phlegmatic excesses, then he makes the caustic that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter on the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 I make a caustic on the head, and two caustics above the temples, and two incisions behind the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 and if there is further need, then he caustically sears above the eyebrow with all small caustics.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	To cause tears to flow within the eyes themselves.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you treat according to what we have said in the section, and it brings no benefit, then give the patient three cups of cow's urine.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After the king, treat with fire and make an incision using olive oil caustery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 And perform two incisions called 'clavis' above the two sores, slightly below the hairs.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And beware of the artery so you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the fire cautery, which is called "clavalis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the oil paper is softened by disease and moisture, then you caulk with this cauldron called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is why this form occurs:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you see, then make two incisions above the sores as close to the hairs are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And do not leave it open except until a third part of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	; that t n's armoust et s. If youd: line Tarn:
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Never does it happen that hairs of the eyelids are converted to scales, and prick the eye, and a caustic is applied in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This is to know whether by fire or with burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 Or the caustic of fire instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 After signing on the eyes similar to the feather of peace, and make it begin as close to the signs near the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then you place soft cotton soaked in egg white and musk of parsley on the wound, then heat the cautery whose form is as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After repeatedly cauterizing the area you have marked with a little bit of heat, let it scab over at that spot.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 and the signs of healing in the work are when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs stand upright at the wound's length.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Then you lift your hand and let it be so for three days, then place soft cotton in butter as long as the cauterization site is closed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying ointment until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And after this when the hairs come in and the paper is softened then you resume the cauterization at that same place as before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if the hair is missing, cauterize until the papyrus is raised to its natural position and evenly distributed, so that it does not prick any more with the other hairs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The fire of medical caustic is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and evenly, then make a parchment in the shape of bay leaves.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take French soap and fine salt, half a pound of each, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 And make haste in doing it so that it does not become cold again, then fear on the form you have made similar to a leaf of myrtle, and place threads upon paper.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And if the illness only resides in one part, work should be done therein, and likewise with both.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 And apply a piece of cotton cloth soaked in oil to the area.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And ensure the patient's head is steady and hold your two hands over the medicine, and gently press and massage every time the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, as it stings like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done so for some time, apply the appropriate medication to your wound.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the stinging is gone, raise the bandage and check if it looks lifted as though by constraint of fire or cut.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And if it occurs like this, then it is well done.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If not, reset the treatment at its place or if the treatment has not worked, continue until your efforts are equal and your eyes aimed correctly.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply clean linen soaked in butter until the wound is closed, afterward treat the affected area with an ointment called "Dyaphena," and others, as long as it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And you must guard your treatment carefully to ensure that the eyes do not lose any of the medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick at its edge, resume the treatment at that place properly, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after the treatment until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 and this is the form of the leaf with myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And know that men's eyes vary in size and shape, and according to this be their constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And let it not be returned on the right path for those who are students of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and if your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary for you to perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Command the patient to put his head in your hand.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and instruct the assistant to place the master's head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or turn.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 after, place soft cotton swabs in an eggcup or glass of lemon juice on the eye.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 then heat the caustic which is ready:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 And it is near the head as if of a bell-clapper shape, with the quill being the fire cautery.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you observe it, if it is pointed from one head to the other, and if you see it, so it is as a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 However, this which is near the top must be moved for your operation.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After pressing the abscess if it is open, and treating any swelling, and drying out.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if it is closed, treat the wound, and apply heat to scars.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 After applying hot caustic properly, and hold your hand to the caustic on the part without hair above the oil, so that your hands do not become foolish.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And place the caustic in the fat of the oil, and let it fester.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be best.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, repeat the caustic treatment once more, and if necessary, leave for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 After that, apply moist cotton in butter, and heal the dry ointment until it is healthy again, and if 40 days have passed without improvement, then apply corrosive medication until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And follow accordingly as described in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for treating fistulas that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 On touches the abscess, and feels its depth.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Afterward insert the slender instrument with which is formed its shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and they make it to the quantity of one ounce of lead;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 and hold your hand or instrument firmly, ensuring that the patient does not move so that the molten lead can flow into its cavity.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 and it is necessary to place over the oil on the sickbed, cotton wool in an eggshell or bowl:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The lead fills up the hole of the abscess and heals it with marvelous healthiness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula has been healed by fire cautery as we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, if it needs to be administered by the needle and drawn back into place on the skin where properly located in its right place.
des crevaices en levres	From cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there occur lip cracks called "hairs," particularly in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small pointed cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And quickly put it in those cavities as long as it flows out:
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, cleanse the hole of pus until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	From the incision of a boil on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the ear, or on the roots of the teeth, after causing decay and pus and is aged and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 And you treat it as we have said in sections, but it does not heal.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Then it is necessary for you to apply the fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After opening or piercing the fistula, and hold your hand until the heat subsides at its source, and thereafter.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do so twice as we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 And if treated thusly, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 And if not, it is necessary to discover its place and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in this chapter of the treatise.
dou movement des dens	The two movements of the teeth (or "dou mouvement des dens") likely refers to dental issues such as shifting or misalignment within Old French medical texts. It could also pertain to treatments involving teeth, like adjusting their position for proper occlusion or addressing dental abscesses that might require procedures akin to modern endodontics or extractions.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but nothing works, then place the head of the ailing in their bed.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After healing the fire cautery, its shape will come again later, place a wick on the tooth in such a way.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 And insert the hot fire caustery into the gaps of the tooth, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After releasing your hand, resume the caustery as you wish.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 After filling the patient's mouth with saltwater pus, and letting it sit for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner that the tooth which was moving is firmly put back; and the softened gums are kept from further movement, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When toothache comes from cold or heat, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then there is need for cauterization according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 And cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 The cauterization of butter is as follows: you take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or silver.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, and applying grease to the wool, then place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 Often do this until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that it is very soft wool and cotton in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron upon it until the heat comes to the union with the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The fire cauterization consists of such devices that you grasp with an iron or copper rod, and it is thick enough so that the heat does not reach to the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cauterization, so that its form will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization has cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Do this often, because the pain will be reduced that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 It is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of that fire cautery, and then let it flow.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the form of the fire cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And perform a cautery on the eyelid that you wish to do, and according to your ability.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And this is the form of the lancet:
des scrophules	the f h. Manze de lapeccest c's.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold humors, and does not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the fire cautery as follows so that it comes in afterward, with two openings for the fumes to escape from the other part of the cautery.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 and place the hot cautery over the abscess once or as often as necessary until it reaches the source of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 If the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to its size, and leave it as such for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And place on cotton soaked in butter until the swelling subsides;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, cleanse and dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the caulbone:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When stones obstruct the ducts due to heat or particularly cold conditions, then it is necessary for the patient to first be purged with soluble medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After performing the fire cautery at the root of the throat, ensure that you do not come near to the throat itself and let it burn only slightly;
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After making the other fire cautery at the joint of the neck near the top of the spine, and it is called "clavi," as we have shown before.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat the joint as we have previously said until it is well positioned.
de la toust	To treat inflammation of the throat, also known as tonsillitis or pharyngitis.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all diseases of the pharynx are due to cold dampness, and the patient has no fever or thirst, and it is an early illness, then apply two fire cauteries on the lymph nodes behind your tongue.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 and another one at the point between the nipples.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 and let the fire cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that is before mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see it, make the fire cautery by touching all the one called "points" from which the form is here before mentioned in ear disease.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 and let the points be up to thirty or near it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the joint as previously described, place the cautery with three dots according to this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And thus they are lighter cauteries because you make them of iii parts each.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding shoulder joint dislocation.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Afterward, place the sickly on their backs and along their ribs.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 Afterwards, remove the key that is within the tight joint of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and if the joint is dislocated internally, then heat the cautery that has two ends for shaping.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 and cauterize the key until it reaches your ribs, then bring the shape of the cautery together with four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 and because it is made from the cautery that has three ends, thus the shapes of cauterization are these three cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the caturery that has three ends.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	On any occasion it is touched upon this particular nerve, where there are seven cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After applying the fire cautery, rub with salt mixed with fat;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After allowing the patient to rest, and not moving their limbs for a long time until they are well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it becomes dislocated above, little happens at first; then make a cautery on the thick part of the cauliflower bone or many dots close together.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is repositioned, and there is moisture in the bone and health returns to the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When the stomach has many coldness and moisture so that it's removed from its nature, and there are multiple catharsis for him, along with usual treatment methods which do not help; then it should be made to lie supine on his back, stretching out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After this, then do three cauldrons on the left side of the hip for an amount equal to one double measure at each cautery point, and two cauldrons behind the two ribs until the marks from the cauteries are in a triangular shape, and have adequate spacing between them so that they do not merge when spreading.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and the cauldrons should be placed front to back so they prick both sides of the chest, and the marks from the caturers are according to this pattern without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you see a large fire cautery within the stomach according to this method;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 And if one has fear of this fire cautery, perform it by poking and sign above the stomach at a specific spot according to the quantity you see thereof;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 Then cauterize with all the caustic substance called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the fracture we have had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and distention, until it is removed from its natural state by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 and the patient is treated as we have described in sections, but it does not benefit them, so it must be ensured that they are supine on their side.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 and apply fire cauldrons in quantities of three according to this method, shape, and figure on the liver, avoiding the epigastric region where the edges of the lobes meet;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And there is space between each cautery, the growth of a thumb.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 and let the cautery be long and wide across the body, and do not squeeze too much at all the cautery site.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 and let it burn only halfway down so that the patient's head may be upright, and make them lie on their side.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 and if they cannot do so, let them be lying down, extend their legs, and lift their arms.
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And if you wish to do so, if you are subtle and wise in the art, cauterize these cutaneous cauders, but be sure not to burn all of the head, for this would dry up the entire body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And it does not reach to boiling point, for the veins are very delicate in that place, and they swell as though to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When it is an abscess on the liver, and you must determine if it is in the fleshy part of the liver or in the tissue.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 And if it is in the tissue, he feels unbearable pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And when this treatment requires bandaging, then one must lay the patient supine with their head raised;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And next, examine where the wound or abscess is located, and then heat the caustic which resembles iron filings, in this way:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 And with fire cautery up to when the core is scorched, and until the sphincter comes, so that the protrusion is fully retracted.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Afterward, according to the procedure of closing wounds until it is healthy again;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And only this type of cautery should be used by those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have spread at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he may hardly work, and in any case, it seems to me that one should let it move freely.
dou cautere de pleuresin	byrto:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said that one must make root cauteries with rhizome as follows:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take a rhizome root of Aristology long, the largest that you can find, and let it be dried, and also as thick and as long as your finger.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And the flesh in oil, and grasp at the fire, and perform a cautery between the forelock and the neck, and small cauldrations slightly descending on the part that is below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly inclined backward a bit.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And one cautery in the middle of the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at both sides near the cauldration that is between the shoulder blades.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not tighten your hand too much, but make it open as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And the ancient ones say that no man should use fire cauldrations resembling a barber's, and they warm it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And it jumps up the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this treatment there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula arises which cannot be healed.
de la mice	The ancient ones said that no man should use a cautery resembling shaving, heat it and place it between the ribs until an abscess reaches; then there is relief from pain as we have described in liver abscess. But in this kind of treatment often fear or illness cause death immediately, or fistula appears that cannot be healed.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the illness of epilepsy as we have said in the previous sections on treatments, and it proves effective, then there are three methods of cautery that all work well.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 There is a way in which you make three or four cauterizations, arranging according to the length of the wound, following the liver cautery method we have mentioned before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 and do not press down with your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient lie on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another method of cauterization is to boil the one with two nicks, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 and lift the head which is where the wound edges come from the left side, and make the elevations of which you raise the head according to its size, following the body's length and width for the cauterization.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After placing two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced from the other side, and then apply the fire cautery, so there will be four in total.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see it, cauterize all with the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the healing process has been ongoing for long periods, and this results in movements like those of previously mentioned treatments.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Caution does not pertain to hydrophobia, but rather to the manner called "esclitics".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you treat as we have described in divisions and the cure does not work, then it is necessary to make four cauterizations around the buttocks, one on top of the stomach, one above the liver, one above the kidneys, two behind the back at the spine, and one spot on the genitals;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And each cautery should be close to the region of pain in the core.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After leaving the open cautery for prolonged use, do not leave the patient's pain untreated afterward.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing would hasten, and they shall together have two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The form of the fire cautery for the belly is shown by us before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 and that one for the back be olive-shaped, as it was previously set here.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of inflammation in the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and filled with pale yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back between the little finger and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 and lift your hand with a turning of the cautery.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too far in, so it would shrink the clear yellow fluid, and let the cautery be according to this method.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 Afterward, perform two cauteries on each leg at the point of the calf muscle;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 and let one cautery be long, one behind the thigh beforehand and another further down, in between the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 And leave the burns to heal for a long time until they break open;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After treating other wounds as we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of melancholy
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When the solution of a swollen belly comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines have burst forth, and cannot be treated by usual methods.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, then do a large fire cautery on the stomach as described here before or the cautery of the stomach, where the cautery circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 and four subtle cauteries around the belly with all sharp cauteries, and two on the groins.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the palm, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When bunions are at their foundation, or one or more, and they are ancient and filled with large cold and damp corrupted humors, and treated as we have said in sections, then it does not help if you do not apply fire cautery.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 For the spine of the back, which is a little forward and forward in triangle, apply fire cautery below the vertebrae two.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 And if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees swelling of the face, then apply a large fire cautery to the stomach as before mentioned, and another on the liver, and another with a piercing cautery over all.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And leave the fire cautery on for long periods of time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the joint until it is sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the flesh which is called "thelel".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you come to the eyebrow, if the hair is short and sparse, then ignite the fire over it, and set it all aflame where the eyebrows are placed.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and leave your hand as well as the caustic to touch the opening of the vein, so that the blood does not clot.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 do this once or twice, and if there are many eyebrows, cauterize each as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 after applying healing ointments until they become healthy.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 and if you use a large caustic on the eyelid, it will have more benefit.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, we will tell you in its place about a disease that cannot be healed but by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is an abscess and it becomes old and rotten with decay and corrupted moisture, you should thoroughly explore the entire area, and be aware of all aspects within that area.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After igniting the caustic that appears sparse, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that has entered inside it, and continue with the caustic until the corrupted or decayed body is healed, once, or twice, or three times, depending on how much is needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And watch for inflaming of the nerves present therein, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 If the abscess leads to the bladder and intestines, watch for these slits, and do not perform this further when fully developed, but think that it is not true perforations.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 After treating the wound until it is cleaned out, and if the slits are filled with pus, and the materials have been long gone, then declare that the slit has healed completely.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 And if the materials have not been removed, determine that the wound is overfilled, and corruption occurs in the bone at its base.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And thus as one of these which we mention within it.
de la maladie des reins	On kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When the pain of cold comes as rain and heavy windiness, and does not take interest in women, then one must make a cautery on both sides with the pointed caustic iron that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we cauterize it completely, there will be three cauteries in a line, and this will provide greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is swollen and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient holds in urine, then you must make a cautery on the part behind it near the bladamoignon where hairs begin to grow, one to the right, one to the left, and each as long as our pace.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 and you shall make I cautery along the back, or two if needed in that area.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 And perform the clavicular cauldrons according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	of the testicles
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the phlegm is cold and damp, it does not allow for conception, and the seeds are corrupted and their ends delay.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 and when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 then it must be done as we have said with three cauldrons around the bladder and two cauldrons forward of the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 And perform the clavicular cauldron as we have mentioned.
de la hainche	Causes of thigh pain:
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the viscid drops descend to the hip bone sac, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And the hinges of departure are found, it is necessary that you causticate the patient on the hip socket with a cautery resembling a circle, and place it so that the socket turns as if in a circle, ensuring the socket is within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And the caustication should be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if these caustications are not present, use three olive-sized caustics and make the caustic as broad as any of them.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And apply until it is properly healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	From the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from coldness and moisture, the patient has been treated as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 Then it is necessary for you to purge the patient of excess humors with foul pills or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After performing the fire cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 and there are two ways to do this cautery as follows:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 That is to say, together with burning medications, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery comes in many ways, among which one kind is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 that you perform three triangular cautions according to this shape on the thigh bag, with good depth and size, and leave enough space between each caution as big as a bean;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 never make the caution in the middle of the thigh, because there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see it, use the fire cautery at the circle we have previously mentioned in the shoulder dislocation.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 But do so that the circle contains the entire shoulder, and all sides are smoothed out.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method used for sciatica when the pain is in the thigh and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make the fire cautery at the place where the patient says the pain is, and apply four small cauteries above the ankle on the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 and it should be a surgical fire cautery, and trim down the thickness of the edges.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers' width from the sole of the foot or near it, then make the fire cautery at where they feel the pain three times or four times on what is called "points" cauterization.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if surgery is needed, if there are more problems;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if it is known that the pain extends from the groin to the thigh, then you shall perform a caustery or circular cauterization with a heated iron and take good care in all your cauteries not to harm either the nerves or large arteries, ensuring no further distress or contraction for the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen some who made cauterizations above the ankle on the foot, and they rested until the entire leg was consumed by it, with the feet in a similar condition, which were pierced and all the flesh corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a treatment of belly where there was death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire treatment on one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the sage advises in the cautery of the haunch: make an iron rod as large as a small nail or slightly smaller, and it should be spaced apart so that the quantity between each is equivalent to the length of a pea.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And let there be hooked pivots over two parts, and they are also like nails, with one iron handle well made.
et c’est li forme:	 and it is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And let it be cooled until all is red and blistered without moisture, then place it under the box of the bad elbow joint, and turn it towards the strong side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 and apply the cautery once with a fire-cautery and leave for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound exposed for long periods.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after the treatment with salve until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Albuquerque says that we seldom use this type of cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few practice it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And indeed this is of good cauteries, which can suffer it, and where it presses into.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The cauterization of medicine by fire is such that you make an instrument with pincers to descend the edge of the wound, and it should be made of iron or brass of one width, and in height have II (2) notches, and between each have the amount of the thickness of a thumb.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they are to be above-cut and below, and joined together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After placing the bag of the thigh above the patient lying on his good side, and press your hand much upon the bag of the thigh.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After pouring between the II circles of the hot iron which is heated in the fire a bit, and let it remain for an hour at a time, and cause the patient to suffer the heat and burning from them.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 In its place, there is a burning pain like from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the mordication is completed, gently lift the limb with the instrument and raise it softly, leave so for three days, and apply butter until what appears black from bruising turns white.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 And let it remain strained for three days to heal properly;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 This is the final aid after applying ointments until it becomes healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make an instrument similar to what you did for the limb evenly;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 This is how one makes a warm poultice, which I have written or treated in the treatise of medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take soda and quicklime, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put into a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 When there is a small opening not fitting, so that the point of an arrow may enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 And put on him who can be well bandaged, and apply honey, salt, and soft warmth upon it, so that after two days you have thoroughly prepared the powders.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And leave it thus until it exudes pus and can be well bandaged, then take all the warmth, and pour it upon salt and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And when this is very pus-filled, it will be treated with the bread of medicinal ointments and other members' fire cauterizations.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 Because it does other work as fuses, and with other medicines that one well-cauterizes the joints as in syrup and honey of cashew nuts and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galien tells of a case where a gentleman was healed from ankle pain and sciatic nerve, which greatly troubled him; and said that no other treatment was given to it but with this cure, and the patient recovered once for all when this cure was done as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And he said in that manner you pluck the fresh and dry lettuce leaves, and crush them well with a little fat, and apply to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and wrap.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And let it remain for three hours or until the amount that the sick person no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then he makes him take a bath until the body is somewhat revived, and he makes him enter bed, and the pain will go away entirely and be soothed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use fire cautery with such remedeby unless after the evacuation of bodily fluids.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat fat candles, it greatly helps.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 and it must be done as follows:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take the bandage and moisten it with old oil, and place it over the hollow that is between the thumb and forefinger, which are called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 After taking goat fat seco, and holding it in fire until it becomes ashes, and then applying to the wool, and leaving it until it is completely burnt out.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 and do this again in the same way, and continue doing so until you think by touch that it reaches to the hip, and the pain is gone.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 And these methods of cautery are called "cauterization by goat.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar matters of cold substance spreading, none of these cases call for fire cauterization; rather it is for those who have an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 After the patient has been relieved of foul pills or similar things, make three lines marked with crosses on their back where they feel pain, and in each line, make V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 And the cauterizations should be done as per "points" type of cauterization;
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 And if you see it, make III cauteries or IIII at the midpoint of the clavicle in this manner:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 Often this disease comes to young children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a narrow waist when they sit up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 And you find it at the last spine of the back, with its appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and observe it healing, then cauterize with a caustic cautery according to the following method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the cautery can be used for each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, using a fire caustic around the spine with a needle pricking two or three lines, and be the points near each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the limb so that it is smooth according to what we have said, and beware not to perform caustic in a spot where there are nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	For pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When joint pains are from moistness that has spread to every part of the body, and when pain comes on in the feet, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and remedies cannot heal it, then it is treated with cauldrons as follows:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 Make the mouth of the cauldron around the joint of the foot, and let the cauldron be olive-shaped as follows:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to grasp above the face of the foot, make the caustic across all the area you claim "no point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pains come up to the knee and other joints, which happens often, then make cauldrons on each third (III) or fourth (IV) of every part, with all the olive-shaped cauldron.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you need more, do so, but do not hold your furred hand until the point is bent.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains extend to the knees and back, administer the fire cautery as we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if pain is in the hands, make points around the small lines twice.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there is no more pain in the fingers, make points above each joint and on the hand's hair;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 and if pain comes near the edges or shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care to the patient and give them appropriate remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healthy with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of sore festering
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When inflammation comes between the fingers and they swell down to the knuckles anew, it is necessary that when you see them healed, you do not use the affected hand for a day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And use things that stimulate the belly, so that the fetus descends from its abdomen.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 After the child has sat on its back between your hands, and command it to warm its ankle until the vein is repaired, and bend the joints at your wrists, and insert fingers into the ear canal, as if making half of a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then prepare the fire cauldrone whose shape is this:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and secretes serum.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then reset the veins to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 And let the minister warm his hand so that it does not return backward;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 Work well on the patient's thighs and place a pillow and bandage under them, and another over the buttocks where he warms his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then place the cautery over the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach on the first attempt, try again another time until you get to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 and be careful that the boil does not burst when making the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 so you do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 and by this, the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for large people also appropriate to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three days heal the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After treating with other salves until it is healed, and apply 40 drops of oil to the patient's back as long as the wound is properly closed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary for his extremities to be well-stretched, so that the veins do not protrude when he attempts to stand and walk into a room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after ninety days, when he wishes to get up, prepare him with well-made bandages and keep them on for another ninety days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And he should have good rest, work little, and avoid excessive drinking and eating, as well as too loud shouting.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when this teaching is completed, it will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will now describe the treatment of tailor in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the routine care of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When ulcers come in other bodies and are known to him, and you see that they no longer grow, he makes a fire cautery according to the amount needed, and it should be one-third of their size.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 Afterward, as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 and none of the old ones have said that it should be cauterized with fire caustics at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But mark the first incision and draw a line for width above the tumor, and another below it, and keep your hand steady during the entire procedure of the scalpel blade.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 However, the first incision is lighter and easier to make.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective; then it must be treated with cautery called 'poins', which should be applied according to the length, size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 if it is safe after the first cautery, it is well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 if not, start another cautery on that one, because it is customary for the affected member to heal where it is close, so it must be done with caustics until the patient recovers safely.
de meselerie	Of healing art
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The measures have been eased at times by caustics greatly; especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 If you can see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning and has been treated according to what we have said in division, and neither descends nor ascends, and you doubt that corruption will infect the whole body, then make five caustics on its head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I insert the knife at the nape of the neck, and the other towards the forehead near the ends of the hairs.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 And it goes behind the two horns, and then in front of the occipital bone.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 And let the hand rest so that the cautery reaches just to the bone, and as long as scabs form on it, such that the vapors of thick humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 And then cauterize around the wound according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And if the infestation is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 And it is clearly evident, therefore you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned above: and the first of them at the collarbone, and another two on the spine down the neck, and six along the spine of the back, one large one on the loins and another near it, and two on each shoulder.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 and two on the elb cuisses, and two on the tendons of the feet, one over each joint in hands and fingers, and above the palm pits.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 and beware of the veins that lie behind them, do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 and never perform a cautery on the bone of the wrist, nor one on the bone of the stomach, nor another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that the more you perform cautery on it, the more you help it heal, and the better it benefits.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy ones do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it must be that cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in handling iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing him of his illness with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until he is healthy again.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healthy, then you perform cautery on the limb according to its size and magnitude.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 and make the cautery a little incision near where the swelling is.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat it with ointments until it becomes healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And never perform cautery and on the hand or foot or back, at the site where the nerve moves the limb, and thus is swelling present.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And in any case, it does not interfere with anyone unless one is familiar with the members and the pathways of moving nerves within the body.
de albaras	The practice known as 'albaras' involves applying a heated iron or substance to the skin, creating cauterization that closes wounds, removes growths, or stops bleeding by sealing blood vessels through heat coagulation.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease known as "albaras" is old and medical remedies are of no avail, then cauterize with a hot iron somewhat superficially, according to the amount of heat desired such that the blister is raised, and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 Then apply a poultice of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with the blood of conies and that of swans, each in equal parts.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And mix everything together well, bind it with a cloth, and apply heat to the area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers through cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a cancer begins to develop, if you wish to stop it, cauterize with the cautery in the form of a circle all around the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And yet, wise ones say to make a fire cautery like with gonorrhea.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 And yet, I do not think it is good either, for I have seen that it can become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to use it before.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 A more correct thing is that they should be treated with fire inside, the caustic called "circulation", as we have said in many of caustics.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	For non-healing swellings that cannot be healed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When some have an illness called "adubaillite", which causes them to die quickly or due to the excess it produces or from the sickly appearance when they are elderly and have little blood, or for their time.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 And you will see him hastening to die.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 Then, accordingly caulk around with many small cauterizations by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After that, leave it so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 It will delay dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire area with caustics, heat the area where the shape is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And insert your hand into the illness called "adubelati" until you feel the heat of the cautery, and make such cauteries that the sick person feels behind in a way that the course of purification is adjusted accordingly.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Afterwards treat it until it becomes perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The care of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way of illness there is called "corrodens," and it's nothing but a mixture in the limb, because it eats away at the members as dry wood does with flames.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in place that may suffer caulking with fire together, then soak the caulk both small and large as required by where the ailment or location is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After caulking all parts until you have removed the entire corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all which is corrupted be pulled out as bone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it rest for three days, and apply poultices with oil until the burns from fire are healed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying the ointment causing heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three days no fresh flesh appears, this is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if not, then resume caulking over what remains of the corrupted veins.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this mengeison is sometimes treated with cold medicines at the site of fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 However, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already discussed the treatment with cold medicines in its application:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 Take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Cords or strings that come to the fingers
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often there occurs that in the feet, from behind, a disease emerges which we call "closed," and it is a large growth that afflicts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this illness is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is known as fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Fire cautery is such that you should heat it like an earthen cone and make it of good iron to pierce the nail entirely, and that it has subtle edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 After heating all around the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it feels cool at the tip of the namen.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 and leave it as such for three days until it begins to develop pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then make an emplaster of well-ground barley soaked in water, and leave the poultice on throughout the night, then the thorn will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the joint with an ointment until it is sound again.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are turned to the back of the body and often occur in hands and feet, it is necessary that you treat with a hot water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	 and it happens this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 Take a vessel of pitch or iron, or the edge of a spade, and place it on the thorn and its sheath, that is to say for warts:
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 and place the vessel so that it covers all around, then put a bit of hot water in it, hold your hand steady, and press with your hand while turning so that the edge of the vessel reaches to the root of the thorn, allowing the hot water to reach deep down to the root:
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 And suffer the patient a little from the biting of hot water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then leave it so, and it will peel off completely at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus do another after another, until you relieve all those that are in the body; then treat with anointments of fat.
li cure dou trembler	of the pen, which to make s le tissaz:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 When anyone shivers from coldness or fever of a quarter day or other, it is fitting that you make four cauldrons on the backbone of their lower back, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 and one at the chest as an olive cauldron;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 it will leave them shivering, and their health from the cold disease will be restored.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 At no time is it apparent before the body has bathed or pustules filled with foul matter coming from large corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 if it is necessary in the first instance that you appear to make cauldrons above each head of the pustule:;
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 A subtle fire cautery made of mister wood, where the tip is taken hold in flame, or from a long aristolochia root, or with a lenticular caustic.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And never apply a caustic at the beginning when they see it this way, and nothing can grow from there forward, but excess tissue is removed where it comes.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 But it must be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is harmed
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Many times there are great consequences of blood from an artery that is cut at the wound coming to the periphery, or in the incision of an abscess, or with a member caustic, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And it is a very grave thing to stop flowing.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 Whenever this occurs with anyone, quickly place your index finger over the vein wound, and strain it very much until the blood has calmed under your finger, and no more oozes out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 Then apply fire to various small and large herbal cauterizations until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then take iron (I), either large or small depending on the wound and its location where the vein is cut, place the caution near the vein while holding your finger, and keep the caution in place until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps away when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the caustic is extinguished, then quickly take another from those heated near the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And continue doing so one after another until the bleeding has stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 And beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and let no other harm come to the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 And you know that when a vessel is cut without severing an artery, it cannot be properly sutured on its own if the artery is large unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 Or through cauterization, or by extraction if it is not treated in another way, or by strongly binding with thread, or by applying remedies that have the power to stop bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And thus tied and strained as needed.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will provide the tight binding with cloths or burning substances on it, or other similar things, if there is no good result.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if it happens to anyone and they have no remedy or medicine on hand, then they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stopped above the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And it should not move, but apply cold wetness often enough that is very cold until the blood has congealed and thickened and rehardened.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And make incisions as necessary for cauterization and application of medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on wound suturing.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and applications of ointments, plasters, powders, and forms of cauterizations.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I have placed that chapter regarding the upper body up to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that it can be read more easily as desired.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this section, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cauterization, and therefore greater care is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision for an abscess, treatments for wounds, extraction of arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 When there is doubt and fear, death comes to many.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many methods of treatment come from people's experiences.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 If it comes from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they easily perish due to the severity and intensity of their sickness.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And one should have fear for these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And among them are those who give up hope, and they say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Wait, I am healed;
et li maladie est despitouse.	 And the illness is resistant.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 It is not fitting for you to heed those who come seeking your aid with this manner of affliction, but rather put greater trust in your honor than in self-interest, and do not act rashly, but carefully from what you are certain and can reasonably acquire.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 And employ prognosis and guidance in treating your patients to where health is restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 And this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and memory among the people.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as I discussed in the previous chapter about cautery, from head to feet, so that you may find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water, headache
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 Say that this illness often arises in children during birth, and when too much force is applied to the child's head.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 and never comes from a reason unknown to us.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this disease occur outside of children, and in all those cases death was swiftly upon them.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 and therefore it seems to me that I should focus more on early treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water and the skull grew larger each day until it could no longer be supported.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 And it was so much moisture that they died, and this moisture is gathered from under the bone above the shoulder blade, between the flesh and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And such treatments are this: when the moisture is between the flesh and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you shall make a wide incision into the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And it should be as long as we tell you, until the moisture recedes.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 and here is how to shape the splint:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is excessive moisture, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross, following this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is from under the bone, and the signs that you see are openings on each side of the head, and the liquid gushes out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not restore them:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 If it is necessary, you must make two cuts within the head as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, all moisture is removed completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After making the gashes for bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave as such until the fifth day.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then let it heal, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be properly aligned and have the patient consume dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way of incision involves examining whether there are any signs of an abscess or pus collection.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 because it should never be present.
aucune fois derrier;	 also, it should never be behind.
aucune fois en destre;	 and not on the right side either.
et aucune fois en senestre.	 And never to the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Therefore cut where the abscess opens and fill with water, and follow accordingly as much as you are able.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 and be careful not to obstruct the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 and watch for blood flowing out, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of restoration
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and has been present for some time, and medical treatment proves ineffective, then the subsequent remedy is the fire cautery with which one ties off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 It is then necessary, when you see it obstructed, that the patient raises his head backward;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 after rubbing the area with an abrasive cloth until the arteries appear, then pull out all of the patient's collar with it.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 then look where the vein is above, and both sides are behind the ears, and few return to them;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Then sign the ends of the bone, then wrap one and the other with a strip of linen about two fingers wide, as long as it reaches the bone, and cut across broadly at the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see this, take the gut strip off from above the artery and tie it upwards as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, let it bleed continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the arrow does not open upon feeling, it is necessary to measure three fingers' space and then apply a tourniquet up to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 and that much blood to be poured out if it is six ounces or so, depending on what the patient can endure, and the pressure in the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 if it remains above the bone without an exit channel, and no abscess forms within, then bandage the wound tightly and cleanse with ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	And when infection until is gone: let it up to cease; sirop dressez it syphon, and sew on after aseepistressure; as it untie the wound to treat with the syring.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When migraine occurs early and with acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old headache, and medicine by methods of medical treatment does not help at all, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have demonstrated.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 The method of extracting them is such that the patient braids his hair from the temples and listens to the artery opened in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and heals quickly like some people who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 If it heals, the patient should stretch their neck with some cloths, then rub the head with a rough towel, and apply warm water until the artery is clearly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take the spatula as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 Then lightly scrape the skin until you find the artery, then cut it at the nipples, and separate cleanly into pieces from each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if the arrow is slender, turn it to the point of the hook, then wrap that part with a bandage according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not coped with, then there will be no relief at all for the wound.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 And track down six pints of blood until three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the arrow is large, it must be tied with two loops of strong silk thread to prevent rotting at the wound site and bleeding as it heals.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then bandage the excess between the two loops with it at that same time, and then, if you see, use a cutting caustic until the bones are exposed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 This is the final work, as long as the patient does not have a fever and is of a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 The fire cautery is used to finish up dampness:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 For this reason, it is of greater help with dampness.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 Or when one must extract the artery, let them fill up that place with old cotton and put it under well-made slits.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when they are to be removed, then use dry medicines that produce heat and slits until it is healthy.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if from the artery there is much bleeding as you do so, then hasten to cover it with cautery, wherein you employ old urine and strain your hand that the wound be cleansed.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you do not have this on hand, then lay it there until the bleeding is clotted, and place cold water over that area until the bleeding stops, and strain as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And the one who is skilled and more agile in extracting arteries should use this fire cautery blade sharp on two sides, but the edge must be well honed to maintain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When inflammations are too prolonged, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And it must have a space between the two blades, and when you are ready to use them, heat both blades until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And be sure to separate them between the two sides because this fire cautery is not suitable for all cases.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and here is the form of the fire cautery:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears of the eyes descend from veins located on the forehead above the eyebrows, and it does not benefit from any medicinal remedy applied there, you see the face of the sick person turn red, and their forehead tremble like with fear.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And those wounds that are kept wet and warm so that the papers (skin) dry out, become swollen, and scorched from the heat of tears, if this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And they called the ancient "contusion treatment", and so you make it over to the patient with this condition who has hair on his forehead, then you make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 and one of the incisions shall be like two fingers width into the forehead sloping down to the bridge (of the nose), and the others shall be twice a finger's breadth above the skin, being careful not to incise the arteries that are also twice a finger's breadth above the skin.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And remove your hand from the extension of the two jaws, so that each wound is as much as three fingers in width.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then apply the sterile dressing with two parts of which this shape is.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 From the incision that extends from the temple down to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 And scrape off all the core that is between the two openings and remove it entirely from the sac which is above the bone, then make another section with the middle incision down to the other second, and then extract this sterile dressing.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the instrument called "culteral" into the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side but on the other side is smooth, not cutting. And that's its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And cut the ribs towards the chest near the curve, and make them smooth toward the bone, and push until it reaches the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And remove all vessels that arise from the head until the incision is continuous to where the core opens, and then make another section in the middle opening down to the other end.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 Then remove the blood evenly, and express the site for the taken blood.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 Then place in each wound a tent of fine cotton, and cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring that abscesses do not form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and after three days leave the wound open, then apply a large amount of clean water, and treat with basil oil balm, and other remedies used for treating wounds, until it is healthy again.
dou reume des eulz	As for the eyes, they are blinded or do not see properly due to this condition.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When certain come with hardened habits, and you see the eyes swoln and small, and blurred vision, and burnt papers.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 and the hair falls out, and they have pain all over their head, and the patient sneezes.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 Then you can say from these occurrences that those matters and the catarrh come only from various winds, and the moistener must treat there where it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is for you to instruct the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut near the center of the forehead, and another wide open hole.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And begin with an incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut until the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move during eating.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is exposed, let all blood flow into an absorbent sponge, then place thread between both edges of the incision and apply lint.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 then cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and protect from hot abscesses.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 when it is ossified, one must rub the bone until healing begins, then treat with things that expel pus, encouraging new flesh to form.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of cinnamon, and make an ointment.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 And apply it to these wounds to heal them completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear blockage
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 All that which flows from the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 either grains, or beasts, or stones like iron, or similar substances.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 or seeds, such as peas, lentils, and beans.
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 or substances that flow like water and easily pass, similar to other things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear as a stone or any other matter that does not reside in the ear, and grows not within the ear, then place the ear against the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see a stone, and if it secretes any purple oil or frankincense oil, then perform an extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 and if it is a condition causing sneezing, then clear the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place cloth or wool between the ears.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 And they raise the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Often healing comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it does not come about, prepare the delicate extraction of splinters, for there is the procedure:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it comes from the splinters, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, prepare the delicate extraction of small wire-thorns;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 and if it does not come out from there, make a grain of tar and pour the head of the gadfly or hole of the ear strongly, then stuff with wool around the grain so that he cannot enter with the gadfly.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 then treat it firmly, as often as we have said it comes about.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 And if it does not come in any way, take linseed which is used for the eyes, and place on some instrument sharp enough to do so, and put some cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 Then press the lens onto the stone or any other object, and grind it down further.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if it does not decrease from all the things we have said, hurry to cut an ear where blood may appear and swelling occurs.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 and the manner of cutting should be that you first treat the patient's headache, and draw out blood according to its power, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the root of the ear near the fat or tissue.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And it is the cut as like a crescent until you reach the bone, then according to your ability, and quickly suck the shard into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And apply the treatment until it heals properly.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if there are stones present and they swell, then arrange for their removal;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 and if it cannot be removed naturally, make a gentle incision following this method:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision in that grain of sand.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not attempt this when you think the stone is wet due to earwax, until you have made many attempts.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 then extract carefully with tweezebar and a suction device, as we have said before, to ensure the extraction is successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In this case then when it comes to the ear, the patient should practice initial sneezing of conditions, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And lie down on the same ear where the water is present.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it comes out strongly like this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 if not, then take many pieces according to the length of your instrument and lightness, and warm them slightly over fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 And place the patient a poultice from his ear, and it rises up in him. From his feet on the other side, and pierces another stone above the one that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 And it continues to move from stone to stone as long as the water has passed all through, and thus it flows completely.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see this, take a reed, and put one of the heads into the ear, and the other head through fire until the thinner reed has burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 Then make others from different reeds as long as water passes through, just as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In extracting the beast, if it is of small stature like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 But if it is of a large body so it can be felt, then arrange for drainage with probes.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 and this is the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the removal of worms from the ears, as we have instructed in the section on treating distillations, and if the remedy does not work, then you must examine the ear in sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 if there are no worms, use fine probes, and if they don't appear, take the hornlike material that is present.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it should be narrow at the base and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And insert the finer part in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient has, then proceed similarly with all the material.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Perform this often until all wounds are healed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not obey in leaving, then stop around the edge of the cloth as I have instructed with stones.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 and if they do not exit as we have said, then administer dilutions that the ancients have tried with arrow wounds, and you will find or treat with dilutions.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 and if you distill your oils and medicines into this instrument in the ear, thus is its shape as you see it here.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And made of silver or brass without small holes and above openings for distillation;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And to apply pressure on the distillation with an arsenic instrument well-made for this purpose, and if you see rust and wind around the tip immediately wrap in cloth.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then pour on your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the jar, and let it be applied to the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then stuff the syringe with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is dripping or seeping from the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And let it scent the patient inside, and be the distillation of drops heated in fire just as one would distill it into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And keep that it is not too cold, for the medicines would not be so good otherwise.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear blockage
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without any hairs on their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And this same thing happens in adults by the outpouring of a wound or moisture inside the ear, and these outpourings come from time to time into the ear if it is not visible.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 At no time does one fail to find relief with poultices, and they see very well improvement.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 Therefore if one comes by it and cannot see, it is of serious healing in various conditions, and where it must be that you place the patient's ear to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	 and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 if you see apparent swelling, then the work is all in this area of which it has form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And be sharp and cutting before and behind completely flat, such that it does not bend the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 if the swelling is of chancre or body of the ear, take it with subtle pinchers and cut lightly until all bone is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if distillation is partially in the ear, take a light and subtle razor blade and shave it slightly over fire, then place or adjust the part of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel the obstruction of which the patient feels pain in hearing, puncture lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Then place a dressing in the ear according to the size of the puncture, and apply ointment with Egyptian balm.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Do not do this for any day until the wound is healed, or you take a dressing and apply ointment with rosewater, and powder it with white lead.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if the ear starts to protrude, it is necessary that you change the dressing and apply another greasy dressing made of rose oil and wax until the swelling subsides.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue treatment until it becomes healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	When bleeding persists, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remed cuing to stop the blood flow which are used for treating dropsy.
de la char des papieres	From removing parchment layers.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This paper linen that comes from hairs when they are wet and dry, it must be stretched with tongs and pincers, and the root of a spatulaceous leaf.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then place them under the lead acetate solution.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if they do not decay, then you may causticate with the fine lentil-shaped caustic and apply the burn after making an incision;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 and many times heal, for nothing remains attached to their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 and when they are causticated by fire, those roots burn and do not return.
de la gresle	Of chalk
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Often paper linen appears with things that seem icy in form and hardness, and so this disease is called "hailstorm," and it is an accumulation of moisture large above and below the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The work consists of these things:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 Take care that if hail falls from both sides, and it is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Then make the slits wide apart, then gently scrap each part, then grasp with tweezers, and bandage it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 If you cannot cover it without slightly piercing the paper, nothing will harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 And if the split is large, then stitch it with a thread, and heal until it is cleaned. ;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 And if it is small, do not exert any pressure, as the ointments will restore it quickly and cause irritation; ;
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the hail is descending into the inner ear toward the upper part, reverse the paper and extend the hailstones with tweezebrushings, then bandage it on both sides firmly. ;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 If the paper is displaced by incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when the large abscess is opened, cleanse with salty water and treat the area until the patient recovers fully.
de la graisse des eulz	From the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Epiphora is an oily discharge that occurs under the skin of children and rare adults, causing great eye pain, leading to redness in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Therefore, they sleep with their faces downwards, lying on their backs, and the swelling covers their moist eyelids, altering the appearance of the epiphora in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the head with your hands and feel pressure between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of treatment is such that the patient rests their head on a support.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 and then take a cloth of flax, and tailor it into a tent shape according to the size needed for each part, then place it over him.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 and press with your hands on both sides so that the parts come together within the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 then make a slit in the membrane with a sharp scalpel, and it should not be wider than the wound made on the vein's sheath.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 and cut through to reach the dislocated bone as needed.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 and in various positions, the dislocation comes from the slit, resembling a white fatty tissue fragment.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Remove it now by grabbing a piece of torn cloth between your thumb and index finger at the dislocation, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And ensure that you do not press into the gap, and move your hand all along the bone up to the end, without touching it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if there is swelling at the beginning of the gap, gently push into the gap slightly until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then remove as we have said, then wet cloths for ease and cooling, place it on the area, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if there are such men who crush stones and place them there to destroy that moisture which has been lodged there.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the healer works until it is sound again.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes to heat at that place, then the healer treats with plasters until it is sound again.
des poilz des papieres	Of hair from parchment papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When hairs grow other than naturally and become old, they harm the eyes, causing diseases as tears are accustomed to and softening of the skin and pus formation, until it is due to the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And there are four methods of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 Or by fire and lancet together according to what precedes or the chapter on cautery, and it is done either through incision and suturing or with bandages, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil into your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it flows well, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 if not, let her pour an arrow through all the thread at once;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and be it near the edge of the paper or hairs sprout from there among these hairs, then draw the thread through all over the paper and turn it to smooth.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 then cut into the area below the paper, away from the hairs closest to it, covering all the shining part from the large to the small notch.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 First remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton or linen underneath the paper, then press down on the paper with a mold similar to a lime bell, so that it should also be according to the quantity you see rising in the paper which is visible at all times.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if there is a part that requires cutting off a great quantity of paper according to how the paper becomes moistened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 then make all the fatty tissue beneath the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large ridge up to small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 and let there be a division near the natural hair growth at the root of the swelling, then insert the needle into one of the two corners as seen, then scrape it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then join the two lips with a stitch from a needle using one thread of fine wool yarn, and bleed the blood, and trim any excess threads around both eyebrows as you do so.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 And if not, then pay it no heed, leave the stitch and threads until three or four days have passed.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 Then treat the wound without removing any dried or tightened stitching materials, as the paper will loosen with the pressure of the wound and healing, but the stitches are movable (as say the ancients), which requires careful work.
et si a une autre maniere:	 And if by another method:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 It is that you shape the paper as if it were like the skirt of a rosemary bush, as we have described, removing three or four lines every three days according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then follow those who ascend with small, evenly matched strengths according to the form here shown.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 If you cannot hold the tongs, and things are not equal, take a needle or wire of any kind, and place it in the wound.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 And thread another line up to the great gash, and a second line down to the small one, and join together between the two lines evenly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin over which you have marked, as we have described, then stitch together both edges of the wound with sutures, until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerotype and similar soothing ointment.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 And sometimes the hair of the skin is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 If it is necessary to use what we have said about making an incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 However, the suture on either side is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of abscesses should be as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 and that you convert the paper and stretch it out thinly as I have instructed, then make abscesses by skillful technique, with fine ligatures as long as the paper and the width of the gauze.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 and bind as two sides where you hold the threads.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 then carefully join the top part to that of the oil paper, and tie the two abscesses with fine ligatures.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that has been stretched will wither, dry up, and shrink until it tightens on its own.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it delays, if the cap is affected by forces, then treat until it becomes whole again.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And when the wound heals quickly, and if there are no more papery edges, and hair cannot grow anymore.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 This is the form of two sticks that you will make according to this shape, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The techniques are such that you should use a fine needle, and wind silk thread delicate and subtle.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then connect the heads and carefully wrap one around the other subtly, making the length of the threads a span long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 Then arrange another delicate silk thread quickly in the sheath and wind it with the first string.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then place your patient's head on a clean cloth.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And be close to the sun so that the procedures can be explained clearly, as they are subtle and small tasks. Then insert the needle into all sides at the root of the hairs nearing its end, and pierce it quickly through the paper with care until you work along above the natural hairline;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then extract the hair down to its base, and insert it into the hole, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then remove your hand as soon as the hairs reach all sides into the hole with the natural hairline.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the hole is treated and hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the hole apart by all threads that you have ordered, until the hole appears through and you can see it with the oil of your eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Once you draw the bowstring and line up the arrow, clip the oil and let it stay clipped for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and a callus forms over the wound.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from the scalp naturally occurring, and elevate it as you have left it, until they lengthen, then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the inflammation of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this disease known as "aleacrati" occurs in the joint, there are two ways it can happen:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens through sudden wounds, or cuts, or fire-cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And in its treatment, the method is to split that welded joint, separate the lips of it, and insert linen tentacles into it, leaving them until they are healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And it is not necessary to use all methods of treatment for things that dry up and tighten.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but work with things that soften, such as fennel;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and rosewater or boiled water and flaxseed seeds are cooked, and unguents mixed with any of the oils, and these wrap around a tent, and treat this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that you do not bind it in any way as it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and these remedies that we have mentioned are not otherwise than addresses of this disease, so that it does not return as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the clotting substance found within the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness that is actually called "Axacrati," and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The occurrence comes from a wound, a tear, caustery, and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 And for the work involved, you must use a needle, which has a double thread, and the hook is in the hole, and pierce through from the left to right so that the threads reach both sides of the eye.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then pull the eye over all the needle, with a thread width of one stratum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the shape of the pattern returns as it should, that is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 But if not, take the scissors and place them in the tear, turn the pattern, and make two cuts or carve inside the pattern.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 And the head of the shoulder has two fissures at each angle of the incision you made, and make them into angles so that when they are joined together, it appears as if the letter 'Z' without its crossbar.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 Then take the cloth as needed depending on how much it is saturated and unsoiled, like paper, then bring together the two separated pieces with a thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply what we have said of softening remedies and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the disease comes from a tear or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary that you make an incision clean of hair on the paper, and according to what has been said above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 Then open between the two ribs of a tent as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 And you must perform the operation according to the form of the illness, for it is very varied in shape, and wise masters devise machines that may possibly restore its natural figure.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And the patients themselves must do the same, depending on what operation and treatments are required in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	With great care of parchment paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this suture occurs in home-made manner such that the paper above is sealed with the fat of oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it does indeed become necessary to puncture a razor beneath the paper, and lift it upwards.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 And the extent of pressure is applied, aiming to match that which is appropriate for the subtle area, neither too weak nor too harsh, so that the patient does not suffer from an excessively strong or numbing spot.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 And make your incision, carefully excising that which is formed, lightly, so the paper returns to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 And cleanse all that is formed, and never in oil with salt water, but use gentle warm water and wine.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then place a tent of lin between the paper and the oil, and cover the wound with soft sheep's wool in abundance.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days, apply more wine and soothing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Concerning the nail of the oil (referring to a method in medieval medicine that involves using an oily substance for treatment)
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 That the ulcer occurs in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 It is of the nature that it seems hard and scaly, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen damp swelling, so that when touched with iron and cooked in a saucepan, cannot be removed.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 and both types begin near the earlobe, growing slowly until they cover the entire field of vision and all light and eye movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the method of incision is such that the patient places his head on a support, then manipulates the eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and lift the paper to your hand, then cut the ulcer edges with small scissors, extending above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take a needle, and insert hair from a horse, or goat, or ox, and strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 Then slightly bend the needle's tip and insert it under the nail. Pierce completely with the entire needle, tie the nail with a thread, and extend above the finger. Shave all hair near the nail that obstructs the puncture, leaving only the root of the skin fold, using delicate motions and small forces; so the body's natural secretion or sweat does not flow through the incision as usual.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 Never extend to the bone only with the needle and thread, just as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then scrape away all the surrounding tissue from which it is formed.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the tumor does not touch or rupture the skin, and that the pus does not leak out.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 and after making an incision, pour some pearl powder into the wound, and make a paste of lead salve, and leave it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the fingernail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a needle, and the knuckles do not fit in, this appearance of a fingernail is often treated with various remedies.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 and as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the patient's side slightly softer, and take a small amount of tumor according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And raise the splinter delicately, and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a swelling afterward, squeeze from your mouth into an oil collier made of litargire and red wax mixed with seal fat, until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Then resume the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is opposed to you in the oil, as for abscesses, then wash it out, and cure first the inflamed abscess until it is cleaned, then resume the treatment as before, until it is cleaned.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of flesh at the elbow causes great harm in the oil, soothe it with honey and clove, and cut away part but not all, ensuring tears do not come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then squeeze into a red wax oil collarium made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From underneath the eyebrow where it arises
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 Some men's nerves are sometimes red, and cover the swelling and bind above the papers and turn to the contrary direction, appearing like a balustrate rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 And the treatments are such that the patient places their head in a chair, then works on their eyes, and does all of this with suitable devices for use here; and supports it with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 Then apply the first treatment, and work completely up to the end with a razor, and make sure you do not cut the oil at the site of the treatment.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 And make the incisions of the swollen areas as we have described in the incision of the nail and small forceful methods by which one obtains them, as demonstrated after this treatise.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 And when the incision is complete and all treatments are done, apply oil of seal or distill it with red wax balm and similar corrosive medicines, and place a cotton ball soaked in alcohol on top if needed to ensure warmth at the site of abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 If it remains for any length of time and the swelling rises up, causing you concern about an abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work as soon as it is healthy again, and thus the shoulder can be set into place using this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 But nonetheless, you must align the treatment for each weak point of natural passageway;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 and in the work of iron tools.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from the work.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red wounds are covered on their surface with oil, and they obstruct the field of view and weaken the eye daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 Thus it is necessary then to first look where the limb protrudes outwardly, and there is nothing else wrong except that swelling.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then you must hold the joint thusly:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Command the patient to place his head in your hand, then tie off those veins along the entire arm according to your wisdom, and let the ligatures be subtle and double as per this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two lines drawn by degrees in one curve following this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 Then you wrap the veins subtly, and let out blood slowly afterwards, until you see that the veins are free from the bandage.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And ensure that you do not bleed the tips of the stigmata, and perform this procedure in the middle of the day before sunlight, being very attentive to your work so that only those veins are bled.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And once you have done this, if there is discoloration in the neck with green and red fluid to dissolve what remains of the boil.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If you cannot grasp all of it at once during that hour, apply a poultice with soothing substances to ease the pain in the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and abscesses are secure, then continue according to this method which is described here until healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 It's a matter of strengthening his constitution:
de la fistule de l’oil	From the abscess in the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 They call the wound "Ariassati" fistulas:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you treat the wound with cauterization and hot ague medicine as I have previously described, and it is not healed, then fashion an instrument to cut into the abscess where it must die, and extract all the pus that is there until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 When the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, return everything to its original shape.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And it is called "sharp head," and made of iron in the same way as described here.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And place it on the spot of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the decay has been healed.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 and do this once more, then restore the spot with medicinal herbs.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 if the wound is swollen and pus appears, and the body of the bow is also swoln, remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen or form a sore, and there are no complications, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If not, there is no other remedy but to return the hernia back through the nostrils according to this method:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And you shall expose the bone a second time with iron and medicinal leeches, and when it is exposed, take out with forceps according to this method, making the shoulder of iron have three angles, and make the shaft as thin as possible as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then place it near the bone by the temple, and keep your hand away from the oil pot. Then turn the forceps completely as long as they penetrate the bone until the patient feels pain if he holds his hand over his nose:
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And then restore the original position with dry remedies as I have instructed you. When the wound heals and hardens, proceed with injecting into the nose:
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 It is a more manageable task for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the nostril
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When all nails are pierced entirely without causing harm to the nose or any diminution, it is necessary that you bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then the vein is cut open and applied to a suction cup or tourniquet that does not hurt in order to draw out blood. Then apply it with oil made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and myrrh, and then compress the area with linen strips and bandages.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 And you arrange the bandages so that they are sufficiently pliable, and each one is folded four times, then place them on top of each other according to the amount needed for the wound.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then strain above a hard bandage of furze, and resume using blisters to draw out the fluid without causing pain.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then remove the blisters and let the strained area rest day and night, and if it softens sufficiently, you may need to re-strain greatly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the bandage after day and night, and if the area heals well afterwards, it is good.
se ce non;	 If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you resume bandaging and dressings and the strain and blisters until it is safe.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a veil seen
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When disruptions occur in the woven fabric, and then open up, and come out like fine paper dust, and are hopeful to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Then if you see the wound covered, the procedure is such that you insert a needle to the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the shin.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 and make it pierced, leaving the first needle according to its arrangement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then cut the place with a double thread and tie part of the eyelid around it, straining well, then extract the needle and put oiled cloth abundantly on it.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 and let it be until the thread breaks with the eyelid, then treat the comforting measures of things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and at no time should the wound be strained by the eyelid on each part of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the hairs show great growth, as a very fine thread appears from the sebaceous gland at the base of the oil duct, and runs with clear moisture, then descends into it, and enters quickly.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then extract until it is clean.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bow of the joint
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease called "alcuncatium" is not just water that has gathered in the oil, appearing as if clear fluid descending, and it is not truly such.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 and the manner of its appearance in surgery is that you make the patient sit on the operating chair properly arranged, then take their head with your hands from both sides until you see the water rise above their hair.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then it must be fixed, and not lowered or elevated, and release the lightness, and show the patient how to do so as usual.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 And if it does not descend on its own, tell the patient that this is acute, and assess whether the bowels are prepared as we have described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 If the patient sits between your hands, then take the subtle linen and rub over the swollen eyelid gently by continuing with the conjunctiva on the cornea and the crown until relief occurs.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it is resolved, pouring in hot honeyed oil or water infused with fenugreek boiled and mixed with honey, then be treated with another remedy until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the joints
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have tried similar methods as in water divisions, and what is appropriate for cutting.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 If in practice according to healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light and sun, and apply strong oil to it.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then place the paper soaked in oil on your left hand if the eye is also turned to the left, or on your right hand if it's also turned to the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take in your right hand, if the eye is also turned to the left, an instrument called "almadala", or with your left hand if it's also turned to the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 Then place the tip of the instrument close to the crown by making an incision with a razor into that part below the lower eyelid near the oil area, then insert the "almadala" gently, and twist your hand until it pierces through the oil layer, feeling when the almadala reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 And it is necessary that the width of the Almadian way be at the forefront of the measure of space from the protrusion to the end of the knuckle.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 and this is its circumference;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 If you see the bone on that paper due to the whiteness of the torn cloth, then place the instrument up to where the moisture is, and express it from one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If water now flows out, then see the patient lying before you with the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After resting briefly, if the moisture reappears in the second way, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly placed and does not rise, gently extract Almadian by slowly turning your hand a little at a time;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 And then reintroduce some pus into the wound, and leave the bone inside as it is.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert the tube or soft linen soaked in rose oil and abundant honey, and secure with a clean instrument.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 Us and those from our time, insert the camphor paste plentifully with honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	et ou.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And pierce thusly the joint only, and do not go too deep, but make it somewhat subtle, then apply cataplasm as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And for the completion of the work, instruct the patient to lie down as they are comfortable, in which place they should rest on their back in a dimly lit area.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 And they should abstain from all movements, and consume light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left, and remain lying as per their inclination until the third day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 Then they shall be moved to the same dimly lit house and tested their vision, and have them see certain things, and then you rejoin the sinew until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And it is not necessary to do this immediately during the treatment or right after the incision now, but you must elevate that area because the swelling rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 If an abscess occurs, release the pus on the seventh day and apply a dressing to soothe the affected area.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it is calmed, release the scab and place a bandage on your face for one day to keep it covered, and let it remain in that darkened house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 Then gradually leave the house and get back to normal activities as you can.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And remember that no one should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And there was once a man from Jerusalem who told us that he had encountered an evil spirit causing severe swelling, which led to pus, but I have never seen any such cases in our land nor read of them in the ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And perhaps it is a novel thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the shapes of armadillo, for those who do not know them see this way.
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they truly belong to the armadillos:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And there are heads of this same subtlety, and they have three corners each.
de la char sor le neis
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 Never do they hatch or are there various creatures attached, from which some appear to be scorpions with many feet.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 and if there are any that have hair of such wild colors, and those that have skin of the flesh tone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 In which case for these creatures that are without hair and not wildly colored, it is fitting to make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 and work its nostrils, and pour the salve on those creatures, and treat their fur.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Now grasp what you must support at the subtle tip of a finger, as long as you know that entire piece is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if there remains anything that cannot be grasped, cover all the surrounding area lightly with delicate movements, so that nothing is left.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 and without any doubt or abscesses, straighten it as it should be done.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 and if it is malignant abscesses, hurry up and cauterize until the wound is closed and all bones are exposed, then pour oil or wine to cleanse and soothe.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If it does not heal, and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is safe;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 If there is no puncture as it should be, know that there is softness in the bone above, where strain does not come to cut.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then it is necessary that you insert a flax thread of some thickness and moisten it with your hands, leaving space or less between each one.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 and place the patient's head with the flax thread at their neck as much as possible, pulling gently until it emerges from within the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 and this method is often done for children in schools, and it is an easy task for those who perform it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 then hold the head that emerges from the neck with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, feeling each in turn between our flax thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do whatever you know to make the child's bowels pure, then lay them down, let blood flow out, and wipe the string with Egyptian balm, and place it back correctly on their nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do this for three days or more until the salves dissolve all that remains of impurity.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 And then place cotton on their nose for several days until it is cleaned, and if dry medications are needed, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 This is the form of the instrument used to purge the head where one can distill oils and medications onto their nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it is of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cone, and direct them thus.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And if you see it, make a tight bandage, and let the extremities be straightened to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And place your hand on the head when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Many times emerges at the head a disease called "telulus," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to sight.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And therefore you must begin by cutting it off entirely, then use a strong bone saw or burning ointment on the wound.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if it is not cut soon after it grows large, take care to observe if it is hard, of fiery color, and poor in sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 if it does not yield to iron as it is an encrusted abscess, because when cut once, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 If the abscess is from severe touching, not from sudden color change, and you see that it can be fully covered, if the patient empties his cup and feels no fear while dressing, then treat everything dry and contracted.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut and sutured.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when there is a continuation of discharge from one of these sinew-covered wounds, it brings little benefit and may occur in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 It is therefore necessary for each case where this occurs to examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood supply intact;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and then approach the two lips of the incision for stitching, then treat until it heals soundly;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 and if the lips are bare on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all areas of flesh until they heal, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, bind them tightly, and dust between layers of blood powder from a dragon's blood.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And apply the powders a fragment of veratrine or other veratrine adhesive on it, and let it ooze until then, and treat with anointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The method of suturing is that you assemble the stitches.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or by needles, as we have said in the belly suture;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 Often happens in the skin abscesses hard lumps, resembling grains of barley, some small and others larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 Then it is necessary to turn the abscess lumps, split each one with a knife, and pick them up with tweezebrushes and apply to each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 Then place it back after the incision of bladderstone bruises, as long as the wound is closed.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and then provide ease from movement, and heal the limb of dry things until it is sound.
de la char des gencives	From the edge of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Often occurs under the gums displaced, which the ancients called "bulbus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 if it is necessary to support with forceps, cut off at its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 then place on the incision of bladderstone bruises, or other powders that bind and dry out.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 and if it returns after the incision, which often occurs, then cut again on the second occasion, and perform cauterization.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 If it does not return after the fire cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 And these are the forms of abscesses to be covered.
des sordens	Of ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Never are they gathered at the head of the teeth, between the gums, sores that are ugly and sharp;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And never are the teeth black and yellowish-green with pus until the infection reaches the gums, and the teeth become foul.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 If it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and his head in your lap, and remove the teeth or sores as they appear, until there are none left.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And do this for darkening and greenness, and jaundice and other defects, until they are healed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 If one removes what is at the first cause, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, begin anew on the second day and the third, until you have regained everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 And know that the teeth need various types of treatments to heal, according to how the work appears, because the razors which do not fit between the teeth have other shapes than those which fit.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 And these forms and others should be made with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary when treating the teeth to delay their pain as much as one can, for they must not be neglected at all.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 because it is a matter of great importance until there are no more reasons to delay the treatment.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient's mouth is strained by chewing, make sure to check for any broken teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Many times did the pain trouble the patient, and he thought it was or toothache, so he tried draining the bad tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 And yet the pain did not leave him for this reason, until the illness is over, as we have already tried with such methods.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 And when you are well-assured of the aching tooth, it is fitting that you scrape around the entire tooth, with strong pressure to protect the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then move your two fingers or delicate pincers gradually at first and then more frequently until well aligned, then firmly secure the forceps.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And let the patient's head be in your steady hands between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth directly with a break, if it does not fall out, take any of these tinctures and put them inside each part lightly, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 If the tooth is pierced and broken, it must be filled with cloth where the roots are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 And if gently extracted using pliers, that it does not break when removed.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 It is necessary to work carefully around the gums to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And make sure that you do not break it and leave a piece behind, as this may cause the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And be sure not to act as the ignorant surgeon does, who through their haste and boldness breaks a piece of cartilage without restoring it as we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 but they bring upon the patient great illness from the roots that remain or from the cartilage that is broken, as we have often witnessed.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 and when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine or boiled water and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 If there is a spreading of blood, it often happens, to empty the place with vitriol paste.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And if this does not work, then you should cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The forms of the tides, wherein one first moves the bones with long points and large masses, do not double when you draw out the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	 and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	They should have large bodies such that they do not bend when extracted, and be well-made of iron, with teeth to grip it firmly.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root remains when pulling, you must place cotton soaked in butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then put in tweezers called "algofri", whereupon the head appears like a physician's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 and they are bone shaped like files and it is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out with all these pliers, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali," which is a chisel; herein lies its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And it is outside and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps from its socket, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If not, assist with all supports, as follows are the forms that come afterward:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two prongs; its form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments used before on teeth and of this instrument which appears to be large pliers, its form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And these supports should be strong so they do not break, and know that there are many such dense supports.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 and similarly of other supports, which may not always be counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 and the wise master subtly examines by himself with his instrument, according to his practices and the diseases they indicate; for there are certain illnesses where the elder did not teach any instruments due to their variety, or if it does not break on the cart or other bones, seek the supports that I have mentioned, and assist with the gestures of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And they are large and firmly held to grip the bone, that it does not slip out but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore it to its place with suitable medicine for this case, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then the surgeon possesses all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the tooth appears not in accordance with natural anatomy and its form is unattractive, especially in young maidens, it is necessary that you discern if the root is dead after the tooth, and it is neither on the right nor left, so it cannot be extracted or filed down.
adonques lou raie;	 Then cut the gum.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 And if it is fixed with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is depicted here, resembling a small beak, and made of iron sharp on one end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth becomes harder over time for its hardness and because you dore moving others, and if it is visible that one can file it down, use a part of this file as shown in the shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is similar to the limb of which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 and in the limb, one pulls out small pieces little by little until it cannot move anymore.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 then the surface is smooth at the end with no roughness, and if its density is too harsh and it blunts the tongue, one must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it neither dulls the tongue nor disrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth become loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the teeth are loosened by percussion or fall out, and the patient cannot apply pressure to what they bite on without them falling apart, and if you have treated it with constricting medicines, but that is ineffective.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 If they require it to be bound with a thread of gold, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And make the cord neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the bones;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you see the bones are aligned, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy bones, then place the head between the misaligned bones, continuing until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then resume covering up to where you began, and gently and skillfully pull the hand until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And secure your ligature at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then wrap the head of the bone with iron wire using pincers, and join them together so they do not irritate the tongue when placed between healthy teeth.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 Then let it remain as tightly bound as possible for a while, and if it loosens or the wires break, they should be secured with another wire.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 If it stays in place for its full duration, it will maintain the shape of the two teeth and the alignment as if two healthy teeth were present.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when a tooth falls out, you should replace it in its original position repeatedly as we have mentioned.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And only those who are wise and patient should be involved in this process, never shaping it like a cheese tooth; place it where the gap is, securely as we have said, and allow it to remain and serve for an extended time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	And cut off the cord of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 At no time is this condition which arises from under the tongue or swelling; such as we have seen.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 Or by accident of a sutured wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 And the treatments are such that you operate on the mouth with the patient awake and hold their head steady while lifting the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 Then cut the nervous ligament of the tongue so that it is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and this is a sutured wound, then use forceps to grasp the wide ligament.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 And ensure that the incision is not too deep, near where the artery lies below;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 And once done, lift up a vein of rosy and easily accessible blood, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And apply a poultice to the patient each night so their limb cannot settle.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 And if bleeding persists, then place sulfur on the wound.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 and if pus emerges, then use a slow-burning caustic agent that is effective for this purpose;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 then proceed with another remedy until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 and if you observe that the sore is colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 and if it is starting to ulcerate, and there is moisture, then pour the unguent on it, and it stinks of a subtle pus, and cleanses from each side.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 If blood does not flow into your work, then apply crushed powder of vitriol until it clots, and return to your work as long as you have finished with the wound.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then raise the limb gently and loosely, and treat other ailments until it is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	For boils in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Never does food go down the throat that is called "swollen tonsils," and they are properly called two almonds; when you treat them as we have said in the section on it, if they do not heal well, be careful.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If there are small abscesses of little size and with a hollow feeling when touched, avoid them using iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if they are red with large roots, do not use iron on them either for the flow of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 But let it lie until it heals, and then you will separate it, or it may break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is pale in color and the roots are delicate, have an instrument prepared for covering, but first ensure that there are no inflamed areas or lingering irritation.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun with their head exposed and their eyes closed, and have them perform mouth exercises while pressing an instrument between their hands, and press their tongue away from the tool as instructed.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 And it should be made of silver or a delicate copper similar to knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 You can continue pressing the tongue against this tool and observe any abscesses, if there are any, take a thread-like instrument and insert it into the wound, then pull gently above as far as possible.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And from any threads with it, then the cap to the instrument, which is its form, that appears as if by some force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And so the head is curved, and one place to another, it becomes very sharp, and made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, use tongs for that form which is shaped like it:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And it has a sharpened edge on one side and no name on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have grasped one of the roots, then cut the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and soothing liquids, and if bleeding occurs, continue to gardarize the patient with hot water, or boiled quince peels, or mugwort fumes, until the blood stops.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat until it becomes well again;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And no more abscesses appear in the throat other than two almonds, if they heal as do the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treated a woman for an abscess that was within her throat, which is to say, one small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and had nearly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like this for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had been torn open twice through its two narrow points.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 So I acted immediately, making an incision in it with a needle, and the pus came out in large amounts.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 then made another incision on the other side for the small one as well, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 After inserting a needle into these abscesses, and cutting out a part, no more blood was extracted.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And thus the throat duct of the woman was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop treating that abscess for long periods.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 And the abscesses would return again, filling up the emptied space I had made until it became quite large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Then I deceived her and cauterized inside her throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	 Thus, she stopped growing in size.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And from these parts I departed, and only God could heal her after me.
de l’uve	The phrase "de l'uvre" translates to "of the work" or "from the work." However, without additional context, it is challenging to provide a more precise translation or interpretation of this term within the text. It could refer to a specific medical procedure or treatment mentioned in the larger document from which this excerpt comes.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When they return to the eye, and it becomes swollen and long, one should be called "perpendicular." (Note: This last sentence is somewhat cryptic due to the possible variations in medieval medical terminology. The word "apelé" could also mean "to call upon" or "summoned by",
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 If it is from a large and round source, it is called "yew".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it has been opened as we have said in the cutting method, and the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the abscess wound is soothed, but it is subtle, then it should be lanced.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And those that are round and compactly formed, and are not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And if it is bloody or of the flesh-like color or black, then one should avoid its incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its width and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press with the instrument that we have previously mentioned.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then insert the pin through the eyelet, remove it from below, and make an incision as described for removing two abscesses.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess beyond its natural boundary.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 because if you cover too much, it will hinder speech and language.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and after the incision, follow as we have said for the removal of two abscesses, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient has fear from covering, then you must apply a method for easing their fear in the process of cauterization.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of cauterization is acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the patient places his head in your hand and then presses the tongue with the instrument as described in our book on fire cautery, and rinse with hot water so that it is not too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And with the use of this instrument, here is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And it has that you insert or push in the medication with a hair or pipe, as with the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument beneath all the medicine on the vein.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 and let the patient lie on their side, so that they spit and belch from their mouth of the medication inside, such that it does not come out to the throat, and bubbling.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 then hold your hand all the medication and press it onto the vein, the quantity of a small hourglass, until you see it working properly and the stinging from the medication is soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 and if you see it, take cotton and wrap around any instrument, wet the cotton in the medication, and place the instrument into all the cotton down to its base on the vein until the cotn is adhered to the vein.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And often do this until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after IV or V days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you need to repeat the medicinal cauldration, do so afterward, and around the eye, apply a cloth stuffed with butter, and cleanse what is there surrounding the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And rise up from cold water, and be treated with gargling until it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This treatment is more beneficial than the incision, only the cauldration;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 If it is treated with smoking in this manner, take calamint and wormwood and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of these in a pot, and place over low heat, and let boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And the piece must be firmly glued with strong clay, and within the vessel there should be an instrument fitted according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads is inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the canal until the vein is constricted.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 After frequent recurrences, until the vein dries up, and ensure that you do not cause pain at the beginning of the abscess's heating, for many things can happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 and not to act just when it is nearing the stage of hot abscesses.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this instrument is not present, then take a canal and insert an eagle feather in the head so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 For the crack of a tooth does not greatly trouble the mouth, and it is good together with healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times there are bones or spines from fish in the throat, or anything else.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 Therefore you must remove whatever you can see and press the tongue to the sun on all instruments, so that you may see movement in the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And whatever does not reveal itself and is found in the throat, it must be made to vomit by the patient as soon as possible so that the meat can cook in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 Perhaps if you extract the thing through vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 Or perhaps the patient will swallow a piece of sponge, or a scrap from a cloth, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 And tie to the sponge strip, and then slip it across.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 And when it reaches its place, if it becomes dry, then you will re-dress the wound.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 and if it does not come to this as we have said, take the instrument of a spatula in this manner:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And let the strums be bent over so that they can more easily enter into the throat, and keep the head raised high.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 and ensure you do not touch the epiglottis so that it does not close, nor push in the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 and move as if the patient is inserting the instrument themselves, because it should be loose or the place is dry.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If you have drawn out all of it, or when pulling up with the entire tool until it's dry.
de la sansue de la gorge	And in a similar manner; and then remove without getting deeper; or you do not penetrate further.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 At no time is there a self-healing without remedy, as I have said in the section on treatment with medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when this does not benefit the patient, then you should examine their throat in the sunlight and press their tongue with the instrument I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see this suction, making it resemble all small hooks or delicate pincers that are suitable for such things.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if it is not suitable, then take a twisted rope, and put it in the patient's throat, then make several efforts to pull the rope tightly, doing this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient has water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then take a full glass of cold water and work on the mouth, causing the patient to swallow involuntarily, and move it often with their hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And as soon as he feels relief from the pain, then urinate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not come out as we have said, then use sage to fumigate the patient with an instrument in the smoke treatment of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times, for they will seek their position less aggressively.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the method of fumigation is such that you take an iron vessel where there are coal fires, and it should be covered with a ceramic lid pierced in the middle, and through that opening insert the shoulder of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 then you pour the fumigation, and have the patient place their cheek in their mouth, and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but it rises up to the brain.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 and now the brain will seek [to be cleansed], and if it does not come out, repeat the fumigametn many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 and let the patient suffer thirst, and give them salty and sour things to eat, and do not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And then it is necessary for him to go out by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the shape of the instrument with which one treats swelling is such that when it can be seen, it appears like bent pincers to enter into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 and has the appearance of a surgeon's spoon, and it is rough like limestone, such that whatever enters, cannot slip out.
et vez ci la forme:	 and this time the form is:
li chapistres des apostemes	The surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 There are many types of abscesses, as recounted here from one to another in this book, and they vary between puncture and incision.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And it is in two ways that one is similar to the other because of its moisture content.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for boils that occur within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 Because abscesses in the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses within muscles differ from those that occur in joints, each has its own judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And if there is an abscess where one must not pierce it until the bowel has completed its process.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are such that one must pierce when they have matured and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When abscesses appear near joints, and they are left to rot there, sometimes the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 Or if the abscess is near a limb, and you delay the piercing until it has matured, harm will come to the main limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 or if it is near the foundation, one should pierce only when it is matured.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 and one must only pierce an abscess when matured with digestion completed, avoiding those near the foundation that may burst openly, elongate internally, and form a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 And cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And it is necessary that you assess the time of abscess perforation when fully formed, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of redness and heat, and softening and debilitation at the top of the abscess, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And it is necessary that you let the perforation sit or be placed further down from the abscess, and wherever it opens.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And the perforation should be deep in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or at joints and veins, and arteries, and everywhere else similar without a protrusion.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those cases where they are dislocated, with the concerned limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in its chronic stage, it should be allowed to drain until complete digestion has occurred, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 If you pierce it forward near his head, then there is poison spread throughout the body, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And sometimes harden the lips and the deepest parts within him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if there are abscesses that can be felt over a wide part of his body, according to what the limbs require.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 And it is necessary that you treat small abscesses and small wounds.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many openings according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 and if such abscesses need covering or sealing, do so.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 When it becomes just like a cloth, and is numb, then one must treat it as with blisters.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 And if there are ones that are split into three corners, and those cut as one would the bellows of a mill, like arrowhead abscesses.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if there are ones where a round wound is made, and other shapes and appearances.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those who have no head, like a surface abscess, one must simply pierce it directly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once but drain part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 Then dress the abscess for another day, then completely empty it.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 Do this many times gradually, until the bow has fully healed.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 However, if the patient is weak in virtue, or women carrying, or small children, or old and infirm men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the arrows sometimes leap at the time of pus release; it may happen that it kills the patient, and do not be dismayed by this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Therefore, avoid this treatment with great caution, and when you perceive the abscess, open the wound, and examine if the wound from the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 and if it's a simple tear, then prepare threads or old cotton for stitching.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 And if it is a large abscess with much pus, it must be drained in each one so that they come into contact with one another.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 And if you have cut into the abscess and woven around it with thread, then fill it with fine cotton or flax cloth strips without moisture, and bind until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then bandage, and apply a healing salve until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 When bleeding occurs at your wound site, treat with cold and soothing water, and apply a damp cloth, placing it over the area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 And if the bleeding persists, manage and treat it well, and apply the powders mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the wound or abscess is very sore, then place warm cloths and bandages soaked in wine and hot oil on top.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 If it is inflamed, and the flesh is raw, then you must wrap it in clean cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cooled oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then drain any abscesses and exudate and heal it, as necessary, until it is healthy again.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 It is important to know generally how to treat abscesses in wound care:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 As I have told you before about how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	About pus. (The word "des" in Old French can mean both "of" or "from", so it's often a matter of context)
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses come to the head and are handled like linen threadworms, just as shears on a young sheep, there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are some that are swollen and such as hairs;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And for those which are hard and painful to touch at the tailbone, there is no doubt if the arrow does not act against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is such that you try with every instrument called 'intrusive', from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, they go up along the long. (Note: The translation is not entirely clear due to missing context or possible errors in the original text.)
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape away all hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave nothing.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 Then dip a piece of cotton in Egyptian balm if available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 If not, use water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And if there is a fever, take care of them during the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 Then resume the cotton as before on the second day and every other day until you are certain it does not remain at night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wound with ointment as is appropriate, until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if an abscess remains unclean, then apply this fat according to these directions for a long time.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and pouring in the herbs, and peeling off all sides, and applying your entire treatment of treating with poultices wherever it is located.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 and if an arrow protrudes unfavorably, do as I have instructed you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat an abscess if it is bloody, and with cutting and scraping as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the cut above a bloody abscess and wet area is more lightweight, for there is little blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if in any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and in those abscesses that I wrote up before from an old woman's head.
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 and found the abscess as hard as a long stone, rough and scaly, that could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 If one had struck it with something, they would have also made a wound like that of a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses coming or at the top, especially those that come from the heads of children and roots of ears, the opening should be done completely every day at the earliest opportunity so they can drain.
et les cure si com il covient.	 and treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	the f h. Manze de lapeccest c's.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the shoulders, and in the armpits, never appearing elsewhere or on limbs, and they are very large, and closely related to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And each scrofula properly arises within its location, just like the head and the abscess at the top, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others which are of an evil nature and do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 in that one where you see good condition at touching, and it appears to have the color of the body, and is not swollen on any side nor red over the neck or artery or duct, and it is not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 If it is necessary to handle from above, and scrape each part, extend the inner lips white as bone, if needed, as we have said in head abscesses.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 And tear slowly and carefully, ensuring not to cut the nerve or vein, nor causing swelling or bleeding, that the hand does not escape, and do not go too far so as not to cut what you must.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not stop working, then put in the wound of bloodletting leeches, or any powders that remain staining blood, and tighten the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And let it be until the abscess is soothed and the wound softened, then start to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 When blood is stopped, return to your work until it is completed.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then apply the correct remedy if there are small warts remaining; cleanse and heal them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if the vein in the root of the wart is large, do not scrape out that wart at its base; instead, tie it off with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then treat the wound with fine cotton soaked in Egyptian balm, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you remove the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and sew them up without leaving excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 If necessary, you must expose and remove the root (of the disease), pull out any pus-filled abscesses, and close up as we have previously described.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 For excessive warts, pierce them where they seem to protrude most.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and do so as previously mentioned, then dress them with ointment and similar substances if they show signs of deterioration.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is properly cleaned, then apply an ointment fragrant with herbs, until it heals completely.
de squinance	Of quinsance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancient ones spoke of throat surgery;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 However, I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those with stridor, it is necessary to excise the "epiglottis" from the throat incision;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And this is not done by it, because all the veins and the painful tumor are found in those with abscesses burning in the mouth, or throat, or two arms.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 Therefore, when we want to sever the epiglottis, it should be cut below three circles or four through a small incision across the second circle, not in the spine nor by the amount of the incision.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 And those who are subject to it must undergo the cutting of the epiglottis where there is no humor, and the vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is fearful, then it must be stretched with a leather strip around the throat to its full extent, and incise until reaching the windpipe.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 and drain any vessels of blood, if you see nothing else, then clip off the fats as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe's lumen which has fallen due to rupture at the location that was cut, and resulting in a loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 and leave the open wound uncovered for some time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 When the time is past that one doubts the stranglehold, bring together the two lips of the wound with skin, and the stitch feels all through the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer medicine to generate heat, until it is healthy again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Not until the throat is completely blocked will you do this; and if the patient appears to be dying, and lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Then you should cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and they will breathe from the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 and so they instruct the physician to leave the wound open until the malady of the disease has passed, which takes three or four days, and then command it be stitched up and healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I shall tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw a maiden take a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting off part of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 and I hurried to treat her, but found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it, but was well that it had not caused swelling or a tight band to choke the throat; however, there was severe bleeding through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I tended to it urgently, stitched the wound, and treated it until she was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 and there occurred to the maiden only that her voice turned red, and she returned afterward to my care.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 for this is why I say in treating the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	From a swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 These abscesses are called 'throat hernia,' and consist of large abscesses the color of jet, occurring mostly in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 and they occur in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	 By nature, and by accident;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 Or natural causes have no remedy.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And accidents occur in two ways: one is similar to us being overfed, and the other is like an abscess that arises from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 and there is fear, and it does not need to work with force in large cases, but rather test and seek all possibilities.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 if you find it as in being overfed and not caused by any vein, then treat it as we do ourselves, and address the root of the matter, if there is anything.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 and search thoroughly, and heal as necessary until it is perfectly healthy again.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 There are many ways to address this issue, of which I will speak all kinds.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 And it is necessary for me to tell you the entire distinction that lies between cause and effect.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that issues are heat and fever-ridden until the boiling over is past, and decay is complete.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 Then rests the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With ours there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sack and according to the color of the body, beginning like a lead weight and growing larger.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And it follows certain appearances or grievous conditions, or dampness, with many colors as I have described in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When attending to this matter, first examine and inquire about the entire instrument called "entromissor," according to its form or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the method of investigating boils is that you insert or find more moisture than exists in the boil, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that pressure has been felt by the pus, then according to the size of the boil.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then remove the entrapment, and take care to ensure it does not move again.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If moisture runs through the vein, observe its color as I have described for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And if no moisture flows through the entrapment, you may know it is fatty, so treat it as I have described for other abscesses, and scrape lightly on each side, ensuring to cleanse with a tool.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot cure it thoroughly, treat it in sections so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if it lingers a bit and causes no grief, apply the wound with corrosive powders from certain herbs, irritate the wound, and apply soothing substances until it is healed by other treatments.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if it is large on us, cut along the edges of the wound, and treat what has been caused by a charm.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the boil appears contrary or otherwise, hurry and apply a lead poultice of antimony, leaving it for two to three days until the wound heals, allowing the blood flow.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to where you left off previously.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 See here the forms of entrapped hemorrhoids, and they are in three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	 large and medium and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And there are three areas which are called "albarets", and one which is called "breb," and they are in three ways.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small, to treat the boils of a fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 Like needles used for witches, they are made of citrine crystal, iron, or silver. Those that are yellow-colored hold value, and those of black color are more effective in searching for the toadstools of a carbuncle.
et sont de III manieres:	 They exist in three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of tumors are mostly similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 Large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and if there are tumors with three types of protrusions as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and if there are tumors that have three protrusions and come in the same three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 and if there are tumors with two protrusions, and only one-protruded tumors, and come in the same three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 and all of these must be present at their respective locations.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The head of these that cut is sharp, and some are such that they only pierce in one place, which we scrape off the skin because thus one does not sever the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And among these inserted ones are reset shoulder blades held in clutches so the patient does not wince at the opening of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	 and there are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 and they are only used in a place like the shoulder joints, such as legs, arms, elbows, angles, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 and never made is another small instrument like lancets for incision, according to this form which stanch blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And you put it back into place at times with blood flow from veins, and arteries, and sometimes they return according to this major form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Never inflame the eyelids of any men when they begin to be corrupted, until they resemble women's eyelids.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 and remain ugly and swoln, and whoever wishes to cleanse them should be according to this form of these lines b.j. until g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then scrape off the fatty tissue, and dress the wound with medicinal pork grease, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and bandage until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And if the patient becomes dizzy and weakened due to its severity, similar to what happens with women, they may faint into two ribs above, by two like splits.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 For one to be held by the other at the end of both, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. up to line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then scrape the skin between the two edges and remove fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and all that is necessary for healing, until it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 If it is not clean or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a pile of cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And leave it to heal and accumulate fat and grease, then cleanse until it is wholesome.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses and elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from under the elbows are forms of hard goiters or swellings, and if there is any containing pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those thus containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	the bat:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of similar nature to hard swellings, make an incision as we have described in cutting open hard swellings, and if the wound is bowed out, treat with fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of rupturing of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is hard where it's above, so often abscesses occur, and in the same way blood flow and abscesses happen.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if you extract with this when it's for the artery, so are the abscesses full.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you feel it in your elbows, and it feels strained strongly;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And when it is for the vein, then a reasonable absence appears.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 And it is foolish to attempt this abscess, especially when it is above the joints and bones and various other places, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore it is necessary to avoid the application of iron, and those in chief should also avoid this, and for those who have arterial swelling above the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 then work with the knife against thorns, and gently remove the artery from its sheath until it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 then insert a needle from one side and cut until the other side is reached, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you for extracting the two arteries that are on the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Then do not move it which is between the two bones of an interposed joint until the blood flow ceases, and let the abscess be released.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 Then treat the resulting swelling as long as the ligament sags.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply suitable ointment to that area until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And if the abscess is too large for the vein, then bandage as much of the wound with gauze as you can cover the abscess, and place the needle from underneath the area held in your hand, pierce it fully, and make a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 Then close the abscess as I have instructed, or bind one part of the two threads together.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 If you doubt whether the son is still alive, then replace with another needle through all of its thread at the incision from the first needle, and pull gently in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 Then cut away the abscess as much as possible until there is no excess left, then cut off the remaining tissue and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply bandages and salves until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	On the cords from abscesses
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	is so they le grand. Et so that: the ondce; if: 1  J. If you to not; don’t. Tort (30. JA Dex.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 This occurs more often in shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, and it is severe abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and causes pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 When it is strongly held back, the patient feels intense pain, and it's not entirely throughout the body, but mainly in the head.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 And becomes immobile from all parts, and neither goes forward nor backward, nor up nor down, and those with joint issues should not be treated with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 There may be spasms.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And those who are in the head or forehead area make the skin contract at the sphacelation (spasm).
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If abscesses are small, use pincers and treat it at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is large, tie it with an incision, then strip the skin, and expose the bone, then stitch the wound closed, and treat until healthy again.
des grosses boces pendans	to make: lesse a l.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 At no time does it occur in other bodies or places than the womb, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, and has fine roots but large heads.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 and among them there are both small ones and very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 I saw patients who had wounds in the stomach that appeared more like fungi than any other thing, with no difference, and they were white, with fine roots, split open, and filled with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I measured them and found one to weigh 18 ouns, the other 6 pounds. The nature of incision is such that you must check if the patient is damp, and the color of the artery is white and moist with subtle roots.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If the head is displaced far, let it be brought to your presence, with the fire cautery applied.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For in bandaging there come often excessive bleeding and if it does not cease, then urgently apply the caustic.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 and if you see the patient hopeful but fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, bind the wound as we have said, and leave it for three days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 and then compressing, do not cease to hold the thread until the wound is closed, and heal by it with little effort.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 but if the roots are thick, be wary in covering them completely for fear of the wind, but well cover most of it, then cauterize so that it does not recur.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cover the swelling which is of a furious color, poor feeling, and looks like milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an inflamed ulcer that needs to be treated, and I will come for the treatment of syphilis afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When there is an acute fistula
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the appearance of gangrene comes from a wound or incision in an ulcer, and is on the belly and there are some swellings as occurs in other parts, or blood flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or inflammation.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 and if it is from the ulcer or discharge of pus, then its appearance resembles the body's natural color, and it feels light without pain, but open to various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the release of the intestine, then there are more diversities, and when one presses on its sides, so it pops back out again, and sometimes it becomes hardened, and greatly expands at the opening of the bath and requires strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it is from moisture, it is a light matter and opens well when pressed with your hand, do not bind it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it is for blood, then open by these signs of a large and hard abscess, which is fixed according to an amount;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is for inflammation, then it is sensitive to touching, and the appearance should be examined to see if it is due to blood from an artery or vein, or inflammebility.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to allow the healing process.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is of the intestines or bowels, then instruct the patient to insert a finger into their anus and stretch it out straight, and tie it all around the buttocks.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 then command the patient to lie supine between your hands, then go around the leg that you have tied at all of the thighs, and extend half of the abscess above the entire great joint.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then wrap it closely with a strong thread or cord made of sturdy silk, ensuring the knot is securely fastened.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then work on extending the end of the abscess above the joint and insert your finger, followed by gently probing with an instrument.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you find that it is stuck to the joint, if necessary dislocate it, and then insert the instrument into the bowel below the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you find pus, extract any excess with forceps.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 If the artery is opposing, or it bleeds, then swiftly return to your work and take two needles. Insert the hollow ends into the wound made in a cross-shaped incision you previously performed for drainage.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and let it be open until it heals, and extract the dead tissue by yourself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 Or you may cut when it is slender and required, then treat as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And extract any blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound as needed, and sew it shut.
dou chancre	Of a canker
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in the section similarities to cancer, and how one must work with remedies, and how one should drain a wound of pus.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And say the canker is deep in the bone, and requires great caution in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place or on the skin where it can be scraped off like cancer found in armpits, thighs, and similar areas, it should all be removed at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 When it is large and old, do not approach it at all, for I have never known any healer to succeed.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 Nor has anyone ever been able to treat it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the treatment, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, involves purging the patient of black bile once.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 Then you should make the healer fast if there is apparent fullness, then adjust the patient to bring them into place for treatment.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 Then squeeze your boils or cancer, and the hair from all parts, and bones in every part without leaving anything.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the site with your hand or anything else, and if there is any bleeding contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until it stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then provide other treatment until it is set right.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 Then we have said in the section about dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done by medicine, and that which is treated with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	 if it only bursts forth;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 and one should not touch with iron in these two resemblances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 that is to say, tympanitis and hypochondria, for it is a deadly thing.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 Therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "eclites" by medicine, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsebesides dropsy, as well as vomiting and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 And if you see the patient of strong vigor, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then thus must one work:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Raise the patient upright with your hands, and let the assistant press the belly firmly from underneath to push the water towards the lowest part of the body, then take a spatula made of pine needles according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And take a sharp knife of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 At the tip, and at all times it must not be inserted so deep that it reaches the intestines when you insert it, nor should it cause bleeding:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 Then look to see if dropsy has moved towards the intebines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 If it is necessary, you must split above the forehead II directly from below under the elbow.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 And if there is dropsy due to a liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the forehead II.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 And if it is due to scabies, make the incision on the right side, and ensure that fluids do not run to the weakened area through the incision.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Then puncture the entire skin with the instrument, and tie it off, then elevate your hand to all of the tissue between the skin and fascia as when draining an amount equal to that of a fingernail or slightly more.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then puncture the fascia until you reach the vein properly positioned, and that is the source of water (lymph), then ligate it tightly, and tie this instrument which has this shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and of hair or thin wire, and at the part below the small hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 and with its edge from one side, near the hole.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 and two on another side, and three elsewhere.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And the head is cut so as a feather, and it has the shape of the incision that the writer carves the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 At the top is the nib, so when moisture comes to ink, it flows now onto the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 Then drain the majority or the third part, for if you drain more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient may die by weakening of their spirit from the weapon's impact, or they sweat profusely, or come close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 However, according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the condition of the patient's strength means, and his hair.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 Then prepare the instrument and retain the water, and it is now held by a key that pushes into the opening which I have discussed, so you pierce according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 Then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering as such, and drain a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do this for any number of days, and be careful not to blow on it until it does not remain but a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt about the patient, and leave too much water, then apply a remedy of burial dust or hot sand, and by sweating excessively or bathing and sun exposure, and drink wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the healing with drying medicines until it is healthy again, and caustic treatment to the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	For the stopping of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There is never a child born without testicles, or if the testicles are small, they may not be in their proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary soon that he cannot pierce all parts of the scrotum very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 Then place a fine sieve in the bottle and tie it securely with thread for three days or four, and when he needs to urinate, untie him so he may urinate, then re-secure.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And perhaps it is not necessary because the strong urine does not keep the sieve closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 Those whose hernia is small, if it is treated with a poultice of lead as we have said, will swell.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not have the sieve in place are afflicted because none are born with it at the top of the penis, which prevents them from urinaturing until they lift their penises upward.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And they cannot bend it because the matter cannot reach up to the muscles, and it is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 And the method of treatment is such that the patient lies on their back, and extends their thighs with their heads as if at the height of a pen, so that the peritoneum may be cut into pieces appropriately.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And beware of the bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, use the ligature for those that are bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	From boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Many times these abscesses come in the thigh, and they have an ugly, pus-like appearance.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And there are both harmful and non-harmful cases;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 If it is necessary to grasp them with fine tweezers and cleanse thoroughly, then place a cotton ball soaked in Egyptian oil.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the fine salve until it is sufficiently healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the boil is malignant, of foul color and draining pus, one must apply a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 Once you have cleaned it and if the shaft is partly in the vein and partly out, then one must remove the part of the shaft that is entirely within.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is completely out, remove what remains outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 For when you remove it together, ensure the head of the shaft is not pierced, and infection and decay may occur at its location.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to treat all that is black and corrupted, then apply on the plaster of honey and flour made from peel of pomegranate fruits and figs, then proceed with other remedies until healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, prepare a lunar cautery according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The caustic helps in two ways together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 it is to know, for the running of blood and for the decay.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert or draw out a bone from the penis, and urinate among the sick.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 and when the hairs are seen above the head of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised or due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape with a sharp tool until the ties are loosened, and free the head of the penis from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then one must scrape with a spatula a little from the tip of the penis and hair.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then carefully separate them (testicles), and place a fine cloth of flax in cold water, so they do not dry out completely.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not an unending disconnection like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Nevertheless, if we perform this work of our own will and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say the ancients did not mention child circumcision, as they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 Because most masters and holy men performed circumcision around the time of death, and during times of weakness, and at any opportunity.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 If there were keys because they have two locks, and sometimes an adze is cut above and below that one below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 Or he recovers the lid, and there is double pain, and in cleansing which is with the lancet's edge is not assuredly at the tip of the limb.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 and in the cleaning of the nail by chance slips away the iron, and worms infest, and often they arise so that there is no need for cleaning and I have witnessed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mundification performed using force throughout the entire line of thread, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the forces cut exactly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 For when you press your hand, smoothly cut equally at all times;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but that the thread is well thick around the leather;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it listens, that you do not tie but only thread the string around the rod solely, and then let it expand in all ways possible.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 Then let it be placed between your hands straight, and the ends are moved by the strength of your hands under your fingers so that the child does not see them, nor any straps.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then place your hand on the rod and blow or cure it, and pull until the head of the rod is straightened.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then cleanse well from any filth that has accumulated there, then tie the head with a double thread, and bind it under one point to another knot.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 and hold with two fingers at the second knot on the scrotum and penis, cup between the two threads, then lift the head gently and straighten the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 then let a small amount of blood flow slowly, for it is mild.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place powder over it and cover the powder with a small piece of cooked egg yolk tempered with rosewater mixed with good and fresh oil, leaving it until the next day, and treating again as necessary until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The form for strengthening to this medication is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 Both shoulders should be held and strong, and the eyes equally as large as the hands.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The mistake in medication is if blood flows out at the incision site.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 Therefore it is necessary to extend your thumb so that the eye makes an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And hold equally with both hands, and if you cannot keep it at your thumb, use tweezebar, then cut the abscess.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if they last for three days, and that which is under the sinew is swollen, let it be left until the inflammation has subsided, and gently scrape away.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 And if you know how to move it, but beware of the sinew area, it will neither harm nor benefit them.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Therefore heal the sudden wounds with powder as we have discussed in treating powders, and if a copious bleed occurs, and it flows excessively, it will not cause harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the same, as we have said, until it is healthy again.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding urinary retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or an arrowhead, or hot iron, or similar things that we have discussed in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 If the urine is not discharged, and you see a retention due to a stone that is at or near the neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to be bedridden with their knees raised.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 And they should lie on their backs, extending the stomach upward from behind the spine, and keeping the patient straight as far as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 And then one must strain to expel the stone from above, which allows for the discharge of urine.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with the entire instrument called "catheter", which has this shape: (Translation ends here. The next line would typically describe a diagram or image of the catheter's shape.)
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And it is of fine silver filigree weaved like bird feathers;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And be the incision one and a half inches long, and subtle at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the manner of urine release is that you take a double thread and tie it at one end with wool or cotton, then insert the ends into the catheter.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 and trim the excess wool, then thread it all the way up to the end of the catheter. Then apply oil or butter and almond meal to the catheter, have the patient sit on a stool, and inflate the bladder and shaft with moistened oil and olive oil and watered wheat;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the scrotum.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient coming near to emptying themselves, but it is not done in this order because where she goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then extend the thread through all the hair gradually and gradually, then urine follows the thread, then remove it forcefully, and quickly drain the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And repeat with the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied, and comfort the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Concerning diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When stitches or blood reaches the bladder, where swelling has accumulated, and you see it to be drained with waters and medicines, do so using all the instrument called "clamps", which is its form.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and if it has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 On one hand, and on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And for those veins from which the cortex of medicine is applied in such a way that it blocks well without additional measures, and if we can drain the moisture, then put as needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you see your medicines in a bag, place the head of the cauterizer into the moisture and drain as necessary.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 If you drain the moisture with the cautery, then replace it firmly afterward.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 If more moisture enters and comes to the bag now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is the form of a subtle cleansing for which we cleanse the bag:
si est ci:	 If you see this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 and from above towards his neck where the ligaments tear apart.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 then take a sheep bladder and place the moisture inside which you wish to use as an enema in the bladder, then tie it between his two nipples with a strong double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 then pour the head through the anus as an enema, and apply pressure with your hand on the bladader to allow all the moisture in promptly, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce roundly through.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then insert a strong thread into these points, then form the circle as you would with wool yarn, and put within what you see of oil and moisture and water, and secure it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do so as if with bladder pressing into your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have discussed in the section methods of stone treatment and arrow extraction together with remedies;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 And I said about the distinction between stones within rainbows, and all signs, and in what stone we must work with cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 And concerning the bladder, and the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 And I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that stones contained within the bladder often occur in children and it is a sign that water leaks from the blad지 of its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And it becomes inflamed, and the patient's strength wanes, he tries many times, then weakens.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 and from these efforts his foundation is shaken.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 And the healing of children up to 4 years is easy, and it is very severe in old men, and moderate for those who are between youth and age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 When we come to treat them, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the feces from within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 Because it always hinders one's ability to urinate.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the hands, and stand them up and lower their head, so that the stone descends to the front of the blad cuffee, and excretes once from high.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then make them sit between your hands supported, with their hands below their thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then grasp and touch within.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel the stone in place, then quickly cut into it near the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not pass with the scraping completely, grease your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is an infant or young child.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 and push it to its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it at the bladder neck.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 then press on your finger, and push up towards where you saw cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand and command him to extend the thighs upwards with his right hand and remove the skin that is below the thighs where the circumcision is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then he inserts the spatulaceum filling, of which it takes its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And causing between those who are between the joints and the foundation, not inward but to the side of the left leg.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 And it is right on the stone, and your legs are placed here or at the foundation, and the body is turned as wide as necessary from behind, and inwardly narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 occasionally pressing on the leg that is at or near the foundation so it moves without effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 and chips that there are stones with corners and edges:
si est griés a issir;	 if they need to be removed;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 and those that are loose, resembling a clump of earth, from which removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 At the collarbone where there are corners and edges, make the cut wider.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 And if it does not move out immediately, then you must use tongs similar to a file at the top, to widen and extract the stone so that it cannot escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 or you insert beneath the delicate instrument curved at the head.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 and if you cannot manage it in this way, slightly widen the opening, and if the stone is calcified, extract with saltpeter.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 and if there are more stones, first remove the largest one from the bladder neck, then extract it with forceps, then crush them, and afterwards any smaller ones that remain.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, one must sew it up, causing a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 For two things occur to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 When he dies or the urine returns through where the eyes cannot join.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 Nevertheless, you strive with irrigation, or with a probe and forceps, until you wash it away in parts.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 And when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bandage it up, and put over it soft cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and pink and cold water to cool the abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 Then restrain the patient'n his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the place is greatly filled with oil and water, then treat with diaphoretic ointment and basil ointment until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And if abscesses arise in the wound and tissue erosion, and blood clots form in the bladder, causing retention of urine which is known to sometimes pass with urine without strain.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Therefore thrust your elbow into the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will cause swelling of the bladder, and inflammation.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then lift the wound from water and filth and pus, and heal it in every way you can, until it is healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, bind him with two bandages on his legs and apply remedies at the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 And if the stone is small, and it is carried from the testicle, and lodged in there, and urine cannot flow out.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If you treat as I have described above, perform the incision many times, and be excised at this treatment site.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already found such a thing to be this way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this shape and be at three pointed ends sharpened into one tip.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take a thread and wrap it around the rod beneath the stone so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 Then insert the drill lightly onto the rod until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 And turn the drill with your hand into the stone gradually and gently until you can pierce through to the other side of the stone.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Soon it will come out as urine; then press your hand on what is left behind from the stone that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 It will soon break and burst with the urine, providing relief to the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 And if you cannot do so for any reason that prevents it, then place a thread beneath the stone and another above, then make the rod where the stone is between the two threads, then extract forcefully, loosen the ligature, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat so that it becomes healthy again.
de la piere des femmes	Of women's pierced areas.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 Sometimes stones occur in women and if they occur once, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons for this.
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 And the second is that it is not possible to find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself in front of strangers, especially when she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third way is that occasionally one may not find a woman skilled in this art of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 And the fourth way is that a woman's stone may be harder than a man's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear associated with it. If necessary for such cases arise, you should engage a wise midwife who knows this well, carefully examine them, and if none are found skilled in this subtle art of the midwife, then caution should be taken.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And this is a woman well-versed in the ways of women's life or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that you follow her instructions for the incision of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 Then it is necessary for her to insert something or a foundation, and search for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And if she finds it, then she must bind the stone below her foundation and advise that she inserts something or a male figure, and desires and presses her left hand against the formed bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 Then encase the stone at the thigh's root against the male figure's genitals, where it is usually placed in an apparent manner, and feel the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 And does not move its two parts above or below the stone or bone, and it must be made small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 Then insert the rod into the wound, if you feel a stone or bone, support the hole until the bone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 This is to say: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you recognize them to understand their nature.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the stone does not pass, then put it in the place of saltpeter paste, and hold it for an hour until the stone is lodged.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your work, until the bacteria are strong, and have the remedies I mentioned for extracting stones from within you to help in your endeavor.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if the blood does not flow, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the place and strain with ties and bandages, and do not attempt again in that spot, and leave the wound alone unless the patient dies.
puis cure la plaie.	 Then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the joint rests, return to your work as long as the wound is strong.
de hernie carnouse	line:
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Rheum is nothing else than a collection of moisture or leprosy, which emerges from under the skin surface where hair follicles are located, containing pus.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and is called "leprosy," and never properly in the fabric of pus; if one believes it to be another discharge.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 and it is the leather beneath the skin surface that we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 This has no cure if it occurs often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of this gathering is due to weakness in the joints, and that material is spread there.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And not from blows to the joints, and this dampness is of many sources:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it shows as becoming yellowish, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this occurs more frequently:
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 and this is the sign of recognizing this gathering, for if it is white like we have described, then it is swellings on the bones, not long as those seen in an egg, and do not open up joints because they are completely damp inside.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is dampness in the membrane itself, then it is bone swellings with a part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another type of egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white sinew, so it feels well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, if it feels throughout the entire intermitted area, thus its form is as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intervention, judge according to what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we cure with iron, it is necessary that the patient be nourished according to their power and the restoration of their body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 then he lies on his back, upon something slightly elevated, and places plenty of cloths underneath him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 then he sits on his left side, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs along the vein line.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 then take the spatulum (spoon), and separate the vein skin along its length up to near the wrist, making the incision straight as you cut through the vein until reaching white fascia, carefully excising it according to their ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then pierce the sack open with water widely from both sides, and extract all the fluid, and then apply compresses, and elevate the sack.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 And do not touch the core of the joints, but only the sac itself;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 Cut it all or in small parts gently its underside, for if you do not cut it skillfully, the fluid will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 And if the egg falls during your work, reset the joint to its place when you have completed the task with the sac.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then align the two halves of the joint's core with a stitch, then treat it as other wounds until it is sound.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if the egg appears to be affected by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are dilated, suspecting an excess of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then bandage the clavicle completely up to the shoulder, and extract the bone splinters, and treat as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if the eagle is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 If you bandage the other part similarly to how you did the first one, then let out the blood, and apply a cloth soaked in oil of roses to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 and apply another cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, and place two diapers above the shoulders, and lay them down with doubled sheets as per this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take two sheets, and attach cloths of shredded fabric in this manner and sew them together at the groin of the trousers, with one side reaching to the back and the other to the inner elbow.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And the other two heads above the shoulders are secured together at the neck with a girdle.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 And never is the medicine this graft of fire needed for a wound made with an iron knife, and take you a delicate cautery tool, and prepare the leather coverings, and heat them as we have said before, so that the white sack containing water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 If you take the cautery in this manner, pierce that white sack at its corners, and scrape it with this hot delicate cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And cover all ways you can, until everything is cleared;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and ensure that the fire does not touch the fat.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 and you tell yourself that this work is more healing;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 and move with care to avoid blood loss, and ensure the procedures are performed correctly.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 and if nothing else happens to you, or there is an abscess or blood loss or other things, then treat what goes against you accordingly, as has been previously stated.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its severity, then proceed with perforation as I have instructed, ensuring that once you are well-informed by the meanings we have discussed, you place the patient on a raised seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 then pierce the abscess at the part above all the surrounding tissue broadly and insert the perforation along the length of the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let them have wide pores so that all their water flows freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then place cotton at the site, bind it tightly, and allow for the remaining water to drain out; then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And if the gauze bandage does not allow water to seep out from the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you insert a tube or the instrument used to treat fluid in oozes, as described before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the wound is expanded and it allows fluid to return, and is reconnected after six months or sooner, and when it has rejoined as before, then the patient will overcome their illnesses over time.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of boils
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Note that in this branch's treatment, there are more fearful outcomes due to various conditions, which leads me to believe it should be left as is.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I will tell you about the procedure and nature of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 Thus, many abscesses come in the body, especially in the joints.
et c’est par mout de cas.	 and it is through various cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 It is to know by excess of sourness and watering, which spreads to the joints or from impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 And it is the color of an abscess according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 And sometimes it can be frightening and painful abscesses, with a dark color, never coming from our arteries or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is from us [the physician], then it is known by the hotness of an abscess when pressed between your thumbs;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 and one must not touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 He who is from vein swelling is known by its reaction to the touch of one's thumbs, and can quite well make an incision in this appearance, and on other parts.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And it is that you cut off the head of the clavicle, then open up at the top, and trace a line down to the white fascia, and release the suspensory from all parts of the uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the uef is already severed with these cuts, then it is appropriate to trace and cut the uef, and remove the head.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is hard at the fascia or in that which lies within the vessels, then one must release all of that tissue and roundly cut off the head.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birthmark is behind or in place, it must be covered entirely and remove the wool as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	, and it the is rense avoir that you to cest l'orent li nt the tissage. And heuist la veill; car covient the beau coure est de, et as tu avie eont lesse est paris s’aveug, se vntet and lea les doth esprove not come cite le rengin luex et est ongli.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a burr, with the softening of the ligaments, and the patient becomes grievously ill as it progresses.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 The treatment of this disease is also as dangerous and fearsome as the one mentioned before; nonetheblie we will tell you about its practice according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then apply suspensory bands to their legs, encompassing all bandages near the thigh, and extend them fully.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 then cut the sharp spatula along both sides of the bandages until they are uncovered, and then scrape each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries located on the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 then insert a needle or thread as appropriate, and fasten it at the first spot where blood has appeared, securing it firmly to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 Then bind with a bandage straight and true, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted sores.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then heal the wound as with other types of boils, ensuring that no vessels burst and either remain intact.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 because by this there comes no harm, and if all vessels come into sight, then it is necessary to treat the joints with all vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 if that the bone loses its nourishment due to vessel incision and becomes hardened and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of sore festering
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The remedies of this branch are through the abscess that comes out or suppuration, or extension in the abdabdominal area causing intestines to discharge into one of the joints.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 And this procedure is due to a snakebite or from its spreading, and they come in these two ways from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 or by trauma, or jumping, or screaming, or lifting of heavy weight, and similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 And the signs when it's from the spreading of a snakebite are that it occurs gradually over long periods, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And the boils are equally spread towards the extremities because the snakebite hastens the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	When it comes to the signs of gangrenous sack severance, as sudden pain occurs at its onset and various abscesses appear near the skin surface, due to intestinal issue and gangrene in the body.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And at no time do they pass with the intestines, and are retained inside, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these cases of iron treatment by fear, it is necessary to remove them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the manner of treatment is that you command the patient to cleanse the intamenent with their hands within the wound if they can enter it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 Then gently grasp its neck between your hands, and lift the hindquarters.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 Then extend the head upwards, and scrape all the skin of the thighs lengthwise;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then insert fingers into the groin joints hooked as needed to open the wound, and be such that you can pull out the bones;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then scrape away the fascia which is under the skin of the thigh, until all white fascia are revealed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then insert your index finger into the area that ensures the thigh, between the white fascia which is under the skin of the thigh and between the second fascia, and remove what is behind the thigh, and between the second fascia.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move the right hand into the hole of the kneecap, and stretch out the white fascia to your left hand, and lift up all the fascia toward the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 And instruct the minister that they extend the fascia upwards, and those which are behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 And look at your legs if there is any intestine wrapped or thick fascia, and if you find anything, take it from the belly below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle or one made of thick thread, and insert it into the back part of the fascia, which is after the patella's leather.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the waist, then cut the tendons that appear with threads, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 Then join them together in the manner of a cross and tie with silk thread, which we have mentioned is below the hide between the joints, with a strong bond using two lengths.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then wrap the heads of the threads and tie them from two lengths apart so that no insect can enter inside, to prevent infection.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 And place the bond according to the first length of two fingers from that person, and after these two lengths leave the silk thread which is below the head of the joint with a width of one finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 And afterwards in accordance with the size of the eggshell it carries.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut into the part that is below the hide between the joints as long and deep as before, just as we have said earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then prepare fine wool with oil, and apply it to wounds, and also treat them as we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to fear of blood flowing out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For this often occurs, leaving the bandage in place until it dries on its own.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 and if there is delay in healing, then use warm water to cleanse as we have said until it dries.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Then treat the wound with another remedy until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	line:
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this treatment, I have never seen anyone who dared to undertake the remedy with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said that it is made like joining branches with twine, after marking above and below lightly.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 Then bind the wound, and treat the incision where there is activity until it dries.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment as we have said, until it is set right.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Never comes gout in the fingers, as we have said, and open the eyes;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And none of the intestines come out with strings, and if they do, it is little, and he recovers quickly.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 And in any case, if he remains too long at this point, the wound appears or a hernia, until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 And this happens by the extension of that hernia which is in the fingers, as we have said, because they are extended, then softened and swollen are the eyes and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And the treatment is with a caustic, as we have previously stated;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 And at no time is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 And it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then you wrap the swollen area with a bandage broadly according to the amount of three stitches.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 Then you extract the sphacelus that is under the skin that follows, then take the thread and place it over the visible area of the sphaculous.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 Then press firmly on the front of the belly, then sew the two visible areas of the sphaculous near the head with the thread, and do both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 Then remove the head of the thread, and do not cover the sphaculous or extend any other thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of hemorrhoids.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Then treat with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bind the wounds, if they are swollen and treat the injury, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is swollen, has no appearance in the normal position, and the cautery moves easily at this spot, closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	For softening of the thick skin of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Often the skins of the joints become soft in some men because the cartilage within them is moistened, and there is fluid to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 And it requires, when one wants to treat them, that the patient be laid down on their back and the bursa is pressed onto the softened cartilage underneath the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 Then bring together the two lips with stitches, and if you see swelling of the softened cartilage, do so first with three or four firm sutures.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Then press between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it heals, and spit out the thread.
dou chastrement	By means of cauterization
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Believes that excoriations are forbidden in our law, and therefore I would not like to discuss it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And there are not necessary two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 And the one is that the muscles respond when asked and they heal.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 And the other, because we often need to tame certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and rabbits and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 I say that taming is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 or by attraction, or by piercing.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In the one where we do taming by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until its horns are softened and pliable.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 then grip them with your hand, until they return to their original shape and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 Of the taming of size:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you hold it firmly, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the bandage, and wrap each one well after you have properly scorched them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 and leave no trace of external or internal sores that are upon the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 and this manner of treatment is different from that done by attraction because with the latter method there may be nothing left on the joints, hence the object seeks dislocation.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites: Those are individuals who possess both male and female sexual organs or characteristics, often seen as a medical anomaly in old texts. The translation should address this directly while maintaining sensitivity to modern understandings of gender diversity. Here is the line-by-line English translation for clarity:
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 the one where both joints are open as similarly to that of a woman's body, or it may have hair and sometimes void in urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is for women, and it is on their thumbs just as with a rod and strings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the treatment of the person and the woman is that you cover all the swollen areas, and treat them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second way, for men whose urine runs through their thighs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of tendentiousness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 A swelling is an inflamed area on the natural part, so much that it's too ugly to look at;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 And some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It must be that you grasp the excess of the swelling with your hand or fingertips, and cover it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do not go too deep, that no bleeding occurs, then treat it with another treatment until it is healthy.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 Et for an injury where it is present at the mouth of the marrow and the bone, and sometimes breaks loose, and appears similar to a cow's head, and therefore they called it in ancient times "the disease of cows.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to handle it as we have said in testing, and treat until healed.
de erratique	Of erraticness
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 If during the woman's monthly cycle her natural condition is not well understood or if the flow is scant.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 and it is a natural occurrence by birth, or has come about due to disease.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 or it is caused by a chill, or from the subtle touch of serpents or spiders, and arises predominantly in the bones, ribs, neck, or elsewhere.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly having menstrual flow.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And recognizing this is done by looking at the appearance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling is often appearing, either near the ears or in the neck area.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is a subtle sore, and it extends to two fingers, then act quickly, and make an incision like this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 Place your index and middle fingers together, and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 then extend the two fingers formed, while it is red from a subtle sore, and oversee the bleeding points;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 then take wool, and millet in oil, and apply it to the lump, and let the woman lie each day at home until she can sit up.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the hernia is hard and tense, it must be cut with a pair of scissors resembling an oak leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the bleeding is from an ulcer or a wound, then suspend it with catgut and bandage;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 And have the hemostatic remedies such as oak gall, blood of dragon, incense, in abundance with egg white.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 Then prepare a bandage made of linen broad enough so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 And thus leave it for an extended time, and apply a tent-like dressing with dry linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then attend to other treatments until the wound is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when there is lead in the bone, it must be treated as follows unless it has advanced abscesses;
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 When an abscess is growing, do not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	Inflamed if it is swelling or inflammation within the genital area: Do Not to be touched directly; follow these steps for treatment as long as there are festering wounds.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Hemorrhoids are outbreaks of veins that without proper accustoming become swollen;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 And we have said in the classification those similarities among them, and their signs, and I will now mention which ones require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that eruptions and hardening in the muscles are fully embedded, and they do not appear to touch, only heal with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are at the mouth of the muscle can be felt, those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore you must put the woman in a cold house, then spread alum on the root ashes, and apply blood-restraining remedeby means such as oak gall, blood of dragon, incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then place its feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse it in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And if bleeding occurs again, have it sit in a concoction of sumac bark and red apple peels, hawthorns, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix with honey and oil, and apply as a plaster on its back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it is blocked, this is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, make him use poultices on his back and the calf of his leg without causing pain;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take lamb's wool and pulverize in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess rests, cleanse it daily with ointment until healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And that which is called "albathir" is red and appears similar to raw flesh, so it should be covered as I have previously described.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then let him heal until it becomes sound again.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscesses occur in the flesh: as cancer and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, erysipelas, skin diseases, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other ailments that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 Therefore, I must describe in this treatise the severe boils that occur on the calf muscle, which are not like the common abscesses one finds.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 And if you witness the work of iron [in treating], then observe whether the boils are hard and at the onset of their appearance, hot to touch, red in color when you see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die down until the pain is alleviated.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 And then make the patient sit on a chair or bench, and have two small chairs where they can lean back, and support their back with cushions to align the parts of the leg that are out of place.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And spread his thighs apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then turn the ball towards the right rib cage, and insert the instrument used to work in the mouth of the bone, which then comes into shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 And it is necessary that when you see this instrument inserted, to push the rod in first to determine how deep into the bone it goes so that nothing from the instrument enters further than it should and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 If the dislocations are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the muscles with bandages so that they do not cause pain.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And it must be placed over the instrument's horn, and you should color or dye the instrument itself.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when abscesses are opened, and they become soft to the touch, it is necessary to cover with gauze at the head and groin area.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when bowels are emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound soaked bandages with rose oil or dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 And place the strong bandage at the beginning of the muscle and over the muscles and along the forearm with clean soft cloths, either in water or melted wax.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat with ointment after two days of healing to make it whole.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 and never lift the scab or wound through an enema of water and honey, then with boiled water or lily roots and aloes.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then apply ointment again.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed by scar tissue, it must be that you avoid iron treatment but treat as we have said in the section on bandaging.
de l’enfantement	When childbirth occurs: observe whether it is a normal delivery or difficult; provide comfort and assistance to the mother during labor; ensure cleanlinees tools and surroundings for safety of both mother and baby; assist with breathing techniques, position changes, and pain relief as needed. After birth, support the mother in bonding with her newborn, initiate breastfeeding if possible, and monitor their health closely.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 It is necessary first to the bleeding that it knows the natural form of childbirth, and if you see the woman hurrying with labor and desires fragrant ointment.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 Then promptly help the child to be born.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 Then you declare that this birth follows natural form, and the baby is also delivered with its head, and the placenta along with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, it becomes necessary to gently press its belly so that the child excretes quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 For when they urinate on their head, the small streams are with them, and the marrows of excess fluids are cleansed by proper ablution.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 And those that come in another way do not occur naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 For it comes upon the feet at no time, and strikes the body or head, and hands, where it comes upon the belly or ribs, and is turned by chance on its neck, and other evil shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 It is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these matters, and free from error and deception; I will show you all the shapes of how one must help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If a child comes onto his head naturally and the woman gives birth painfully, and the vigor of him is weak, so have him sit on a seat or women hold him.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 And let his natural essence of oil and fenugreek be cooked, then pour the boiled residue between his two fingers in this manner:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 And cut the little finger, and wrap it around until its moisture completely dries out.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 And rub the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then enema the woman with a mixture of muscatel seeds and fenugreek oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 Then press and induce sneezing due to condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Now straighten the child's.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And if the two hands arise, one must reset them gently and gradually.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot enter, place a woman underneath him, and lift his feet upwards.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then stand the patient on the ground, and instruct the woman not to push during standing.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, grasp his hands with a loop placed in front of you, extract the child, and reset him evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 From the removal of the child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the child comes on its feet, one must place it upside down.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 And then gently turn a little at a time until they are equal.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then grasp the pieces and extend them slowly bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 If it falls up to the knee caps, as commanded, and you make them sneeze due to this condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it is fallen far, if God wills so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, if it turns a little and a little more, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	heu's. Morgueil ougt they are not enst;
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not come forth as we have described, take musk extract from the head of a stag, and linseed oil, and melted resin, and pound all into a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 and apply this concoction to the area inside and outside of the woman's womb, then make her sit in warm water until up to the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 and once she is softened from it, give her a mixture of myrrh, apply it there, and leave it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 then make her sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and strain her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, as the child is now fallen.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From an issue with the child's knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When a child comes to this condition, place your hands gently but frequently.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 Then slightly suspend it by its neck and let the feet hang downward, and lay it on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 Bend its hands gently but frequently, and then press the hands over the abdomen, and remove the pillows from underneath, until it is positioned with feet downward.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 If the child does not move, take its legs and form a position with them, then raise the abdamenow press gently on their hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And now slightly but frequently push on the child.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 Command the woman to continue as long as the child has moved.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the dislocation of a child coming out wide with one hand extended during delivery.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It's necessary to engineer repositioning of the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 If you cannot bring it back, lift the woman and move her.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed, and raise her legs straight.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then treat the swelling as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then examine how to reset it.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 And deliver the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and command that she push until the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of dislocation of the child on its neck, with hands spread apart, and face turned towards the mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It's necessary for you to wash your hand, then rotate it slightly, and gently ease out.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when it is even, apply the natural swelling of fat and oil as we have said, then command that she moves slightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 When you have accomplished this, make it sit on a chair, and command that it bend.
et la fai esternuer.	 And let it sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for the entire second procedure
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When it comes to this in the manner of a second course, cover the second course with your fingernail until the moisture is expelled.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 and if a child lies on its face with its neck exposed, cover the buttocks so that they are not retained, and let the child move.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 then place the child inside, until you have positioned it as is appropriate, and command that the woman should not bend at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	 Then gently lift.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the outcome of bones.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that hemorrhoids often occur, and sometimes they do not appear at all or only three or four times.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not a strange thing, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Two are strange things, and do not exist at all if few names them.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that they are multiple, and are distressed by the leech who departs from them, which is linked to bile.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And none of them come out naturally as all things do beneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if they come out quickly, then the treatment as we have said, and let there be subtle bile, and make swiftly what it makes.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And so that it may move to health accordingly.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 They are not formed in marriages I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they take the form of a child through careful measurement with great glory, and it is fitting that bile governs all this, for on occasion similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 If done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	le parti clow.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you treat a woman with the dead child or womb, as I have mentioned in the section, and if there is no force, and you are compelled to perform manual work.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 if it is necessary that you ascertain whether the woman is of sound health, and has no condition or fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 if it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and have her shoulders raised, and legs elevated;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 and the minister examines her thigh of two parts, or if she is tied to the bed so that she cannot treat the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 then rub the mouth of the mons pubis with oil-moistened musk and fennel seeds, then anoint her belly with these oils and musk;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then gently insert the curet into the marrow, then aim to place it back or wherever the incision is suitable for suturing, and be careful if the child has been injured so that they do not descend on their head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the incisions are made into its joints or on its neck or mouth or behind the palate or below the beard or under the chin or near the hips, and if the patient is paralyzed with their feet touching, then they insert a pin or middle rib.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And it is appropriate to tie the incision on its right hand and place the cork between its index fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the incision into any of these locations that we have mentioned until he reaches his purpose.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 And this is the form of the swelling:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then place against another bump where you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 And then evenly stretch it by moving from one side to the other so that they may come out, and make the bumps aligned for holding, as is their form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 If a part remains, anoint the physician's hands with oil of any sort, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If none remains there, place this small cone or higher up, and keep it until all of it has been expelled.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to gripping, you must wrap it with a bandage until fully.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 then the splint at the base or ankle joint, and thus you must do so in the other hand, and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the child's head is large and off-center when exiting, or it has an elevated forehead, you should place a cotton swab between your fingers, and press the top and extract the fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 When you use the instrument called "almidach", it takes shape with the essences or extracts that follow this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 And similarly, make so that the child grows naturally to great size;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 And then treat the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out again and is forced back, split them as long as there are any remaining issues from the injury.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 And if it cannot come out, break it by pieces with whatever force you can muster;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if it is swollen in the abdamen or under the ribs, you need to pierce it until all fluids are released.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, then there is slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the marrow is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if it is out in the abdomen or udder, you need to extract it with a drainage pouch wrapped around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 And they make a bubble on the belly or the udder, as long as the moisture inside is correct.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if other limbs are lame, and the head remains stiffened, then they push their hand far into the joint socket, and pull it up to the mouth of the socket.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then he inserts a pin or two, and twists it firmly.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And if the mouth of the socket is contracted due to an abscess that has arisen, one should not attempt treatment immediately, but rather apply moist and fatty substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And he applies emplasters, and soaks in softening and moistening waters.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the child is near its ribs, then place it properly as we have instructed for a live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if there is no power to do so, then cut it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, if there are abscesses as we mentioned come in the muscles;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 and if blood flow is disrupted, then it must be put on a restrictive diet, with other remed cuing.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with twins inside her womb; one was dead and the other alive, which she cut loose.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	cail as it: MID and noit. If yout theme Middle.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and pondered for a long time, unable to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong attraction forceps, and extracted one bone initially, followed by others after some days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly concerned because the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	dont est the in; do not too that gaspits ou les s.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I will treat the wound, and despite injuring bones with my hands, until it heals completely;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 And so it was that it remained healed for a long time in this way, then became slightly bent at the level.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 and I have not recorded such an example because when masters encounter strange things, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Double resetting of dislocations back to their place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 After this comes the form of pressure where one finds relief.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 And at turning as in the hinges of two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 Nevertheless, the horn should be more subtle with restriction, and made of iron or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 And the mouth of the bar should be one foot wide, and the edge of the trees half a foot, and long an inch and a half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 And between the two joints there should be two adjustments of the same iron bar, which are firm in both places, half a foot long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 And these two adjustments are bent in the mouth of the barrel to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of iron or boxwood according to the look of pliers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 And it has two heads to dislocations, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 And when you see the muscle completely exposed with the instrument, have the woman sit on a bed with her feet and legs spread apart, then place both dislocations together in the groin, holding the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Then work your hand with the instrument as you have adjusted the tongs equally, according to the quantity of flesh that is exposed in the groin opening until she achieves what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 These instruments are all similar and come in various forms;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the wounds have been prepared, the work is much quicker and higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not doubt the instrument that you have prepared it, for its needs are by no means excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it's necessary to instruct the patient to hold her sphincter, and then perform an external conditioning, and restrain her hands by the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 If she vomits as a result, that is okay.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, take a container and cover it, then place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare (vomiting), such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, yarrow, and dandelion.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs or any of them should be boiled or brewed in water over the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 Then place a rag or cloth on top of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the vomiting mare (patient), and wait until the vapors enter her.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 Then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If there is a relapse of the swelling.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with oil of mastic or high-quality musk essence, and then apply it as a poultice, followed by a linen bandage.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when she finds it, gently stretch and extend it gradually until the bone does not protrude.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then massaged.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 It will come out and relax.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the bone is extended too far, we have said to perform sneezing treatment and fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 And if it is not of all this that we have said, ensure you do not deceive in treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the gall bladge, tie it to the thighs of the woman and then enema with medicinal ointment of tetrapharmakon.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 if you loosen and reset it, and strength returns;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 but always, when it moves like this, bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and weakens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 If therefore fumigations with vapors are needed for it:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 None of the old ones have tested fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fans the woman for holding back the flowering and secondary growth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it seems like a serpent, and place the head gently into its natural position, and wide-set eyes near fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And there are fumigations over the embers, and lichen until it is burned away, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	c so that lesse que la ou not le t;
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Children who are born lacking in foundation perceive their existence not as solid but as being threaded with subtle fibers.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 Therefore it is necessary for the patient to grasp that which is threaded within and not be distracted by filamentous thoughts, and keep awareness so as not to touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply lin cloth with wine and oil, then proceed with the salve treatment until it is purified.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	by  fairet s the a bo: MRIse bonign tant that son les line; and c’s il ac fu: Then they may be ma;
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And never shall these threaded thoughts come from wound or abscess healing;
si covient coper celui soudement:	 if it becomes necessary to address that which is threaded:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 If you treat them as we have said of the pain from swelling.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula at its base.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Phlebotomies that arise from beneath the base are inflamed, and those arising near the base increase in size over a period of two parts, or to one or more phlebitides.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 and when that inflammation is old, it works, and with increasingly white or subtle pus, these phlebitides are never free from them.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 and known by what comes out or evacuation when the patient has an emission, and sometimes they turn up in vomit.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And if to phlebitides that penetrate up to the bladard, and up to the middle of the member.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And they reach up to the hip joint, and near our lower back.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And thus one encounters a persistent pus at the base, not drying out.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And you should push your index or thumb into it and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 And if there is twisting, you should insert a thin rod or horse hair, as long as you feel the rod or hair with your hand.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 and if you do not sense it, and there is no discharge, windings, or stench as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 believe that it does not break through.
si te haste dou curer.	 if needed for the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass through and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tentacled appearance comes near its place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 If there is no twisting and the pain persists within, then it remains bent, and no medicine or bandaging with salve helps.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these persistent abscesses there is no effective remedy but hard work, and the foolish tricks of people who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In the one that is neither persistent nor old, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have tested, and it requires that you lay the patient on their back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 and lifts the legs up to his hips, with his hips inclined towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 Then apply a tent of linen or silk if there is twisting, until you know where the tenting occurs.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels numbness in their base (of limb), then you should apply your index finger there; if it is felt, the tenting has been effective.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and if between your finger you feel pus or blood, then know that it is present.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 but do not operate on it if it cannot be cleansed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 It can always be cleaned well, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 And to aid with this is to ensure that one properly uses the subtle fire-cautery according to the size of the abscess as previously mentioned.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 and it heats everything thoroughly within the abscess until reaching near its foundation;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 And do this two or three times as long as you know that the charred parts must be scraped away, appearing like an eagle's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then the curing of soiled rags with honey until those charred parts are removed, followed by anointment ointment binding them and solidifying.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If this is not achieved otherwise cannot be clean;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 And if it becomes torn, and does not puncture up to the proper depth at its foundation, then place between your thumbs an even thickness of char or silex, and observe whether the abscess comes out from under that covering as white?;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 If you apply the plaster at the beginning of the abscess and secure it before bedtime, then proceed with the fire cautery until it reaches the edge of the swelling.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 And the abscess will be relieved, and healed.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Then reshape those crooked claws that look like a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if blood is won, cutting between you and the vein; cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 For the fire cautery combines two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 that is to say, the drying of these dislocated joints and the coagulation of blood and removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 then the curing of stained garments should be washed with butter or soaked in a sieve full of water until they bleed, and seize them as the discoloration fades.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Then treat the wound with soothing salves of tallow, and they are drying medicinal substances.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near to the very foundation, and is distant from the body, you may touch your thumb or wrist, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the tenting, and within it is the bandage or sackcloth or linen cloths, or there are signs to pierce, if there be no remedies but faith and hope, by means of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 or you may cauterize as we have said, or wrap it until fullness, or if possible let it tent and then treat as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 and do not wrap too tightly, so that you don't constrict the bandage that holds the foundation, and let evacuations occur as they wish to.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 then treat it, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 By chance it may heal, or you remove the covering and clean it after it is dried near the foundation, or by tenting or with another instrument sharpened.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 then model the false cartilage that is in the wound as much as you wish;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula in the part further from the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 if it were an easier matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And no times are there fistulas according to this manner:.
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 and when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is close to the foundation near the skin above, then take a pierced tent according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it inserts a twisted thread of two, and wraps the dressing around all the thread into the abscess until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is within the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that pierced one and place your hand or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 And treat the head with bandages, and bring together both shoulders as one, and hold them together, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 And do not loosen until the sutures have healed completely, once they begin to split apart.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 Then care for the wound until it is fully healed and cleaned.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, make it pierced in every way that you can, if it is not too hard.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For do not attempt to pierce the abscess if it is too firm, and then heal it as we have said until it becomes healthy again.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of a pointed tool used to make an anal fistula is very sharp and one-sided with a cutting edge.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and on the other side not because it should not be cut as seen here:
des emorroydes	To treat swollen glands, the following methods are used which we now explain to you; but do not forget what you heard before about various techniques of fire cautery.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 Abscesses occur in two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 or they are embedded in the foundation, like resin grains, and there may be small and large ones, and often associated with some blood loss, and one or more abscesses that undermine the foundation and the head of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 But those that are dry have little moisture, and accordingly either a bit of clear water or a bit of blood, and they have the natural color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 and the treatment for those who have them in their foundations is that you instruct the patient to wriggle so they can move into beds, until the foundation becomes loose, and cracks appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 If hasty, and you wedge them with pincers or clamp it with your fingernail, then strip them to their roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 And if the nails cannot hold due to their moisture, they are taken with thread or cotton, or a piece of silk.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 And you extract them from your two (fingers/toes), then strip them, and dust with hot powders that are at hand for cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 When you cauterize them as described or by fire cautery, it heals other ailments until they are healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter clister to cleanse what is at the base, so it can come out clearly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 If the pain persists, and if threads are strongly placed on the foundation, then there is a light cure.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 And that you pluck them with your fingernail or pliers, then scrape them, and treat as we have said until they are healthy, and he fears an incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 If it is necessary to suture according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Take a thread of wire and insert into a needle, then draw the wire through above and make a hole with the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends away from the eyelet so they are apart.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 then pulls the wire tautly, then knots the thread, and removes the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one end loose to absorb excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 then place a woolen cloth soaked in rose oil or resin on the foundation and cover it, instructing the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then let them be until they come out, and once they are expelled, apply salve or other treatments until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Doubly firmly and solidly at its foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it often becomes firm in the intestines and through natural constriction, especially when the disease is old and medicines do not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If it is necessary to dress the tip of a finger or toe with skin above it that does not allow for wetness.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 then treat until it becomes hardened as required.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 and if it cannot harden, resume the scraping more forcefully than before until it becomes moist enough to be scalded.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat until it is sufficiently moist.
dou fremit	And the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 A worm-like appearance occurs near the skin and spreads widely.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 And it never reaches the bloodstream, causing numbness like that of a shock and spreading throughout the entire body, more so in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose or a strong vulture feather and place it over the shiver until the purple circle fully surrounds the shiver.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand to cover the entire area until you grasp it entirely with friction, and place it firmly, straightening the joint from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this tremor as a spider or iron of this form, and be subtle from below and crosswise above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not perceive pain, hold by the two, and press together.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see it, then cauterize the joint as with a fire cautery before or after.
de la forme dou clistere	loin.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 At no time is one made to use silver, lead, melted copper, or molten tin;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And at no time are these small and large suppositories used as according to what they have been prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Thus, what is administered in the treatment of children who are weak and painsome are small [suppositories].
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enemas is as follows when broadly applied or if the belly is bound according to this manner: [translation continues with detailed instructions on how the clistere (enema) is administered, but specific details are not provided in this excerpt].
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 And if there is an upset or the belly bound, as you see, and the head pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And on one side it has an opening, and in the other, two.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And let the belly or arm be treated with medicines from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and pierce entirely around small openings, leaving space between each one, then insert strong thread through these holes X times, tying it as tightly as on a goat's skin;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicines are ingested, tie them with strong thread to an instrument in front of it, then administer an enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medicines be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply to the anus of enema oil or butter from eggs, or similar substance, then gently insert it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 then the physician inserts with both hands together until fully inserted, then withdraws the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to expose the thighs, allowing the medicines to exit as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 If he sleeps all night without interruption, it is better assistance.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer the enema when the patient is suffering from a bowel issue, and the medication quickly leaves, it may recur until they are well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 And if the hemorrhoid is at its foundation or abscessed, make the enema as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 and it is the method of giving the subtle enema in which the body is restrained thusly:
des plaies	Wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have said earlier in the section on wound care;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 or we shall say about treatments for hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and where they are located, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things by which wounds are made are through cutting of stones, and with a sword and knife or lance, or staff or arrow, or similar objects;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 or made according to the body's locations, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, thigh, abdamen, liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, because memory will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 I say that when a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, if it's due to stone movement or similar causes, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess of heat.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 If the head wound is almost immediately sawn off completely if it comes from blood of the wound, and let the skin be opposite to the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 And heal the patient with a diet rich in wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if it does not want to be healed, then reduce its meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 And place on the wound if an abscess appears there, apply a cotton ball soaked in oil or in a thickened wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 And if there is no abscess, then apply to the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by air or dust, as I will mention later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the arrow has been moved, apply certain ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's grip and similar, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, then join them by suturing, just as I will describe for abdomnent injuries, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound exposes bone and is deep, and holds only slightly to the touch;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 then treat the wound with medicine and restore hardened fat in place of leather, instructing the patient to eat hearty meats as tested wheat, also like fowl, along with similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find or suspect putrefaction, but it does not affect the bone, scrape away all of it and wash with wine, then heal.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be tied without a cord, and it cannot be stopped by any medicine, tie the artery with a thread as you find it dislocated.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if these wounds are small and simple, they require light treatment:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 and that you apply this powder which dries as soon as the blood moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 And the method of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	 Take incense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 Blood of a dragon, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 live charcoal three parts, and the powder finely ground, and apply to the wound, and bandage firmly, until it dries well and rejoins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 and then cover well, and leave it not slippery, unless it swells.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 because the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	t les mare;
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound moves inwardly, especially at night, do not put this powder on it again.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 but apply some digested ointments or finely ground barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then continue treating other ailments until they are healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And if there is a bone fracture with the wound, and it is small, extract with subtle forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And I will tell you about this concerning head fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound to the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes or in the neck and it is simple, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or arteries of the neck are severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to leave the sore alone, and not put anything constricting on them, for this harms the nerves and causes them to recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 And do not apply anything cold onto the wound, because the nature of nerves is cold, and their connection extends to the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But use the medicinal salt, as though boiled in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, and cook it again in gentle water, and other ingredients according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind and bandage it, then treat until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if wounds are deep and filled with pus, then pierce or lower them.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 And if the arrow is embedded and blood flow occurs, then extract it, remove it, and cauterization may be necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 And if the spine of the throat is embedded or a tooth, and nerves are preserved so that the flesh may heal, then extract the object from the laryngeal fold, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then apply suitable dressing and let it heal for some days, then treat with disinfected ointments until healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if the wound has caused damage to the bone, seek medical attention.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 And if there are bone fragments, if you can pull them all out, and those that you cannot remove, let the wound heal until it scabs over, then clean and align the edges.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, powder as I have instructed.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone and a sinus in the wound, treat it as I described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	t;t:s.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it's a wound from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, observe if there are signs of venomous poison that affect the patient severely.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Then you should know that the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder immediately in the first hour, nor bind it to prevent the blood from flowing out too much, as this can harm the body. Then heal the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 And if you have no ointment, place a piece of old cloth in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on their back for three days or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 If there is no sign of spasm, nor severe body shakes, nor twisting limbs;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the bone healing, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Remove bandages and other dressings once it's healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if it cannot heal or work properly, then know there is an abscess;
si la cure si com on doit.	 Proceed with the treatment as needed.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, whether it is straightforward or more complicated, treat that which lies before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 Or if it is large, bandage.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 And if it is small, powder, and embedded in the bone with broken pieces of flesh, attend to the wound, and extract any splinters if necessary.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not protruding, allow the wound to rot, and ease the extraction as needed;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And for other wounds in other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Doubtless rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The hernias of the abdard are large and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 From the large wound, none of the intestines or their nerves may protrude, causing an intrusion thereof.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 The stitching is easier, and any small wound is worse than a large one, because when you put the bowels back in more often, if you don't do it regularly.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 Because the intestines swell soon after feeling coldness, they return more often, and therefore minor wounds are moved because you reset the intestines to their place rather than others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that the purging of the belly is in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The two common stitches occur for the belly's suturing, and the other wound types on the body and the other specific stitches are common to other injuries.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And yet they are more appropriate for the belly's suturing, and I will say each one and declare it. (Following this line, the text would likely describe the four types of stitches in detail.)
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 When a wound is small and there's no internal injury present, and if it requires resetting, this can be done in one of two ways.
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 or due to the small size of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swoln by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is caused by the cold, you should treat it in a certain way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Soak an (linen) cloth or a fine rag in warm water only, or boil and strain the water before use, and apply to the intestines until they are no longer swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 and do not repeat this procedure too often; it should be done gently and effectively to relieve the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 When you see the swelling recede, gently prepare the intestines with hot or cold water, as this will loosen its opening to some extent.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument by which you remove ganglions.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 The first treatment is to loosen it up so that no one should cut into it without great necessity or need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And this is the method for splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 If you split deep within the cavity and it does not yield, then examine its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When a wound is swoln and the intestines have burst forth, if you can reset it to its natural place in its proper location, because this allows movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and located below the abdomen, one should make the patient lie on their back with legs raised higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 And if it is below the stomach area, raise the head and hindquarters higher than those areas, and similarly when the abdomen's folding occurs on one side, adjust so that the affected part is raised higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And thus you should manage as I describe in large wounds and medium-sized ones.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 For small wounds, do what you have learned, then take among your hands a skilled surgeon who will grasp the entire folding into his hand and bring together the edges.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 This is the common way to suture wounds, and it's that you grasp an awl or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound about one finger's space, and insert an awl where there will be a good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 And pierce the two heads of the clavicle with the two heads of the shoulder blade, which is behind the skin inwardly, until you have cut through that part, and join together the two heads of the shoulder blade into four altogether.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 Then strain a double thread through the needle hole of two parts, then immediately join together the two heads of the wound, and leave one inch space, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so according to how many needles are needed, until the entire wound is secured.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 and be needles of medium thickness, both subtle and thick, for subtle needles can pierce the entire width, and those too thick may not enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 Therefore, it is necessary for them to be aligned properly.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 And it does not suffice to insert the needles too far from the wound and skin, lest they cut through and disrupt the wound before healing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 And then remove the needle heads so they do not pierce and hurt the patient while sleeping, and place towels or cloths over the needle sites to keep them in place, until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds because they use a single or double needle therein.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second method of suturing is common and involves bringing together the two edges of the skin with both ends together onto one needle or using a strong, medium-thick thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And when you have located all four together, reset the arrowhead in the part where you began, following the manner of stitching garments.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 And place space between each stitch as wide as a small finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 These stitches are the home, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his abdomen, which was afflicted by a knife, with the wound more than one span long, and the intestines were well two spans large, located within the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine as it had been for twenty-four hours, and the wound was bound up until the fifteenth day, and healed through care.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And the physician judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 and did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where there was none to be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And place softened wool above the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Here are the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 Take the needle and push it through to the inner part up to there.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 When it has pierced the correct width from right to left, then lift up the sinew or edge where you inserted the needle, and make it pass through on the other side from within to there.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as a furrier does with furs, leaving one edge once and then picking up the other, until the entire stitching is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second manner of suture, as Galen properly says, is like any other method that joins the two parts together naturally and applies one head of the sac to the other end in such a way.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Pierce with a needle or nearby thorn and make an incision just enough, leaving both ends of the sac.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 Then turn the needle, and further pierce it until almost to its end, at both ends of the sac.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then further pierce each part towards its end in two other thorns that are opposite to it.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And this is the proper way of suturing, and it is most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen says this word, and many attest to it, that one must sew the abdomen with two needles, where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 And one need insert a needle from one side and another from the other in the manner of those who sew straps.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And sutures that when the rupture is within the belly are more painful than those of other abdominal wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The assessments of the wound are such as the assessments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 and it is so when you find the fresh wound fully bleeding, as if the arrow has moved it, return to the intestines and stitches:
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 then apply a dust of alkanet with charcoal and if the arrow has moved it, place any ointment that is available until the wound closes:
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 And they pull out the hair, and let it grow smoothly, and observe the markings.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healthy again.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if you have no medicines, then apply the following as soon as it starts to ooze: wool or old cloth and move it twice daily until healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 For in certain simple wound situations, you need no other medicines besides these.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 And if you suspect that the wound is affecting the main body parts, it is necessary to grind linen in lukewarm oil or rose oil and apply it around the joints and below the knees.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 And if it causes pain or swelling in the belly and occurs frequently, administer a black wine enema, especially if the inflammaturms reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And it pierces within, knowing when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is diseased because of the weakness from wounds and its delicate condition throughout the body, and its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the pus exudes from the wound, reposition it as before like the intestines when they are fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 and if it is old and become dry or blackened, one must lie the wound flat that is black, to prevent any bleeding from occurring there as veins and arteries may be present.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 then cut out what is between the joints and place the two heads hanging from the area above the wound downwards to ease the extraction when pus comes out, and the wound swells up.
de la routure dou boueil	them: it is f, which cannot be the following them if not the unt;
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, one may attempt to restore it in some cases, as I have seen a man afflicted by an arrow or a stab in the belly.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and became infected and turned into a fistula, causing pus discharge and winds.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I gave care as best I could based on what I knew, and did not stop draining until it was healed, and the boils subsided.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the patient might have harm in their belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and there was no pain, but stayed in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 and said some experimenters that when it is a small wound in the intestines, it must be tied off in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 Take fine thread to large heads, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the thread has pierced through one side, tie it above the two sides, stretching its loop out.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 And then wrap the head, and it holds so that it cannot dislocate again, then apply another motion afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed.
et cout la plaie.	 And close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the head enters into the intestines and brings no harm to the patient, one can reattach the intestines with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 Take the head of this thread from the intestine that is cleaned thoroughly, and then tie it to a thin flaxen string coiled tightly, put the thread through the needle, stitch up the intestines, and return them in place.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 And this method of suturing with fringes is not different except following the path of trust and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 And if the wound is large, especially when it's in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, requiring subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, or if she may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 That any wound or abscess, when it festers, is universally called "fistula," especially if it rises and flows outwardly.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And a fistula is due to improper vein growth, hard and bloody, where there is no pain, and it grows like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 and at times clear as bowl glass, and at other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 and sometimes little, and at other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 And I have spoken in the classification of wounds, that any wound not healed has no cure, and it's only due to one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 This means to say, by the cleansing of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	 Or due to its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 Or because there is hardness within it and along the lips, so do not allow any growth of hair;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 Or where there are too many knots.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 Or if the skin is dry, and the material is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 Or if the medication is not good for the treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 Or because the decay is a form of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 Or due to late digestion and slow health deterioration in that area, fleeing naturally.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 Or where there are wounds or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the healing methods with herbal medicine in that section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Leaches occur in all parts of the body
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 Know that leaks occur in all parts of the body because there are fistulas from large veins and arteries, nerves, or spleen, or intestines, or bladder, or some ribs, or spinal column of the back, or any joints of hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 and if it is in the primary property of the limb, and like blisters.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 And all such fistulas require serious healing, with only labor and ignorance involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned earlier, but you trust in the healing, and witness its cure, then take a tent of silk or iron, depending on whether the faster straight.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if there is a twisted abscess, gently probe with a fine instrument to bend it, for the incision must be made around its curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the abscess has multiple openings and you cannot thoroughly explore it with probes, dilate it through one of the openings, for moisture can spread from one opening to another, and cleanse.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then you should examine it carefully with your hand to know if there is bone or nerve involved and whether it is swollen at the front, and ask the patient about the pain felt upon pressing with your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 And when you truly know the location of it, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the locations I have mentioned to you, treat accordingly as I have instructed, including broken bones and corrupted cartilage within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 And then the healing until it is cleaned, and if the fistula is well placed in the right spot, it must be cut open at the front as much as you see fit, then place woolen tents soaked in medicinal water, up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine dissolves the excess that has accumulated at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then apply balms and unguents with a holy charm, ensuring it is thoroughly sanitized.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it's not cleaned thusly, proceed with the cautery as we have instructed, and if the bone is compromised by the fistula, then cut into it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If veins or nerves trouble you or principal limbs, as we have mentioned;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, treat as long as the decay affects all of the bone, then care for various matters until it is healthy again.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 And if it remains unhealthy, and forms a bow as before, understand that you must not stop until the fracture is healed.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 If exposed and worsens while at the core, remove all decayed tissue, then return to normal.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it becomes so healthy, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 But if not, understand that the decay is too great in advance, and you cannot proceed with treatment.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 If there is no other remedy than waiting for natural healing.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 And if there is a small piece of corrupted bone that you can extract with pincers, use an appropriate tool for extraction, and if there are many pieces, remove all of them without leaving any behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the moisture works against it, there is no error or fear; use cautery and moisture, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot extract them within an hour, place something that prevents decay on the wound and leave it until they are properly positioned around the bones, then afterwards they will more easily have their bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, like of the leg or thigh, remove all decay until the blackness covers the entire bone, then heal the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if there is a large part affected by decay, and it comes close to molting of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 If necessary, sew it up completely to the point of decay, and then treat until healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you about a case of an abscess that occurred in a man's leg; take it as an example and guidance for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 He was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, as materials emerged on the leg, and it formed a large abscess, with no obvious reason to open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 but the physicians worked so much that they opened the abscess, and consumed a lot of materials from it, which turned into an anal fistula, and there came a great amount of pus affecting all areas with wetness in the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 And many doctors tried various treatments for two years without any success in the art of healing, until I was called upon, and saw his leg and the remedies used to care for him, with what was needed through great orifices.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 And it became red in a youthful body, and had a lemon-like color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I built a tent on one of these supports, then searched all the supports, and found that each one came from opposite sides of every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 So I hurried then and examined one of the orifices until I discovered part of the bone, which was found to be decayed and infected, with the infection reaching the inner side of the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I thought that what appeared to be the decayed bone was all there was of the infection, except for what I had shown.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 And began to heal the wound with soda remedies for long periods, but could not unite.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 And then I resumed and discovered the bone as before, found continuous decay in the bone, and fat, and bone fragments, and sought to unite the site.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 but I could not even grasp an inch of bone, and all its power was lost, then I reset it with remedies.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 And it was quickly healed and united, and did not restart the work except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and out of fear for his life that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood often caused him to groan, but he was otherwise entirely well, and in place of the bone grew a hard planking, which was of good condition and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither on arrival nor departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated thusly:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take hold of the ligaments, and strain at the head of the bone that opens, and command no one to extend it upwards.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 and place another larger ligament along with the first, and tie it below the cartilage that is over the bone, and extend its head, so you pull away the corrupted cartilage from below, revealing the cartilage at the location where it should be seen to heal properly, ensuring the cartilage does not remain attached.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 and insert a piece of wood or a spatula below the bone to scrape away the corrupted cartilage;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And let it heal as much as one can see and feel the decay, and do so again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the decay is within or in a part of it, expose the cartilage completely;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then apply a heating irons off it, and then join the two parts of the putrefaction with heat enough to melt it completely, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 and if the putrefaction is at the joint, cut away the corrupted joint, and join the bone from which it was separated on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 and if the putrefaction is in the continuity of two joints, there should be no other operation than cutting them apart.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 and if the putrefaction is at the knuckle of the hand or foot, it may be a serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire about that rotting, how it affects you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 and cleanse yourself in all ways possible, but let the vein or nerve not harm you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And you should know that the incisions and sutures for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance of their flesh, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 And therefore it is necessary for each type of procedure to have its appropriate instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 And you should know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways diseases manifest.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If you consider the instrument needed in accordance with what is appropriate for it.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The head can become dislocated or due to humidity, or because of force.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 And when you have applied the medicine for that corrosion through medicinal treatment, and they prove ineffective, it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes either by death or malice (witchcraft), which is greater due to the failure of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and afterward comes the corrosion of members in one member through the whole body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 If you hurry with the covering, and if it is by the sting of certain venomous beasts such as scorpions, snakes, etc., then if the corrosion is at the top of the hip joints, cover them quickly and do not give any space for it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it comes up to the hand, then protect the joint so that erosion does not reach the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 And if it comes to the arm, then protect the shoulder.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 And if it passes beyond the shoulder, it is death, and there are no remedies except for the amount of its usefulness.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 And so do this when erosion comes or festers:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 If it comes to the first joint, then protect the other joint after.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 And if it festers or swells, then protect everything that is affected.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 If it rises to the leg, then protect the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 And if it comes over the knee, there is no other remedy than having the patient die from exhaustion.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And the manner of using leather or silk on the limb is such that you bind it above and below, extend two sticks one from each side of the binding, and another set of tools to sever the tissue between the two bindings at a width of an inch, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then remove the leather or silk and place a linen strip on each side, ensuring that the material does not touch the healthy area, to prevent further injury and infection to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if bleeding occurs while you work, cauterize the wound promptly or apply some constricting powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then return to your medication until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And I will tell you what happened to one of us during sickness:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 It happened a blackness that seemed like scorching fire, and the corrosion first came to his right foot, so much so that it consumed the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastily cut off the foot with a sword and was saved.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 And long time afterward the corrosion came to his hand, and it happened to me, and I applied counteractive remedies after bodily cleansing, but could not stop the corrosions.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And I vowed to cauterize his hand, and although I did not want to do so, hoping that the remedies would suffice.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And he doubted as if I were to cut off his hand, that he would not die, for the vitality of the man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 and he despairs greatly, returns to his land, covers up with a coat his hand, and is well again.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 and I have not counted these examples as mere coincidence, but for those who need to know this practice.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 Never does an abscess occur in the nutritious part, and it remains so long that it causes a great swelling of fistula.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 and then they protrude and burst, causing the fistula to open up, and remain as if it were a vein.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 and the skin above is as delicate as fine cloth torn, not reaching bone nor nerve, such illnesses are called "healed," and they are not called "fistulas.";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 However, if it is so swollen that it reaches almost to the bone at its core, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 And if the wound is so deep that you must remove all of the flesh, and especially when it is fine, like a fabric.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and this should not be done due to its decaying nature.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you suspect that the flesh is hardening, and there is no decay at its core, and the flesh consists of cartilage, then treat with a cleansing enema thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 Check if the breasts are large, and the bowels that are there emit a foul smell; then administer an Egyptian medicinal cleansing enema made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 Take ease, and oil, and leadwort (litargire), in equal amounts, and put them to boil in a vessel over the fire until the medication turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 And then take as needed according to your necessity, and do it with water and honey, and clyster the chest, and strain the urine.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 Leave the medication in for two hours, then extract by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this many times until the chest is reshaped, and it becomes loose again.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 And never clisterize with water of ashes when this medicine is not prescribed, and that you draw ash from oak wood, pour water over it, then strain the mixture, until you know the chest is properly shaped.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes should be used for clisterization, but use water and honey with some crushed lead.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 When you cleanse with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes it holy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 And when you have done this, and ensured that the chest is well purified, if the suppository causes a stench to arise in it, then take an empyema of roses and oil with wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 Or you administer a suppository using certain medicines and unguents, of which I have mentioned the properties in treating unguents.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the opening in the chest is small and nothing can enter through the suppository, slightly enlarge it with a tool, and then insert a tent of Egyptian unguent or basilisk unguent until it expands.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If the wound is too wide, if the edge and leaves it enough so that the enema can enter there, and if pus with blood flows above, place a cup either higher or lower than where it is located.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the bowel is in its initial stage, do not leave open sores.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot cover the chest from beneath as you see, arrange it in such a way that the bowel descends to the lowest place where it is located; because when the bowel is at its beginning, do not leave open sores and if you cannot cover the chest from beneath as you see.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 so that the bowel descends gently downward, and let nothing remain of the bowel.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 And take binding medicines to put on the wound, and extend over a linen bandage covering the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 Then apply pressure to the puncture on the skin that is not more than twice as wide of the first one. Apply ointment under another bandage according to the size of the puncture, and place it over the wound to reduce swelling, without removing the large bandage until after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And those who have a puncture on the skin often want to remove it when there is swelling and blood coming from the wound, depending if it's poison or little or enough, digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness and whether there is an abscess or not, and depending on how much medicine has been used, extend it and observe the nature of what comes out at the puncture in the wound, knowing that the vein will heal soon, and approach health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 And then reset it in the morning or after a day, and when you reset the wound, change into another bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are filled with undigested pus after many days, say that the breast is not at ease.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if you encounter subtle corruption after long periods of time, do not despair over health, for healing is nearing.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are those who delay healing in their wounds by using coal, and others who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 and suffer from an unhealthy swelling of the breast after many days, believing that the breasts are not affected;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 and they delay drying of the breasts, becoming protracted, applying nearby medicines composed of moist substances in body but dried in virtue, as with an ointment ending, for there is a significant part of vitriol, and it is this final medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take the ointment that ends with an oil rose, and add the essence of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	 Then you bind it and apply thereon;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 Then you do the same with it and use it; applying more effective heating when ointments of daffodil are not available, or taking mirra, aloes, and incense, grinding them, powdering them with honey while on a fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 Then you attach a gauze, extend it over the breast, and never apply an aspersion long-term, using roots of heavenly lily which are similar to barley flour and quinoa.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 And use simple or complex remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 Grind them, turn into powder, and put with the honey I mentioned, and apply.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 If the illness is chronic and not healed by this treatment, then understand that infection has taken hold, causing pressure on the bones or hard parts of the body.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 If the treatment of a fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of abscesses of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Pus is an abscess that arises from under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or sometimes occurs in other areas.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 and when it becomes ulcerated, and is not taken care of, the abscess may develop and run, ooze blood so much until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly consumes the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 And it leads to erosion up to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain and swollen fingers with discoloration.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and if the treatment does not help, then one must cut off entirely the excess tissue that is attached to the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 Caustic applications are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 If the nail then hurries to prick and begin to poke, and bleed, it is necessary that you place your knife underneath the nail causing the bleeding, and lift it upwards, carefully cutting away the subtle vein blood, and apply medicinal substances on fire and corrosive properties to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat with ointments until they are fully healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if there is corrosion in the bone, cut it out and treat with fiery remedies, for as long as the bone becomes corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you see the jaw deteriorating, cut into it as previously described, then treat until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 And if it is thrust out and swollen, and it causes great pain, then one must first soothe it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 Then cut the thick hair with a sharp blade diagonally above it, and ensure that the cut does not reach to the bone which is below the hair, as this would cause the patient great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if it occurs, then apply something soothing on top of it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the hand is throbbing.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocations that occur in the shoulders of some men by chance are all flesh, and sometimes there is bone or an epiphysis, but not always, and they do not form at the joint root, where their growth occurs within the shoulder.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 Those who are born with deformity in the groin do not move, and those who are born at the hip joint may sometimes move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The cut for someone who is fat should be light, in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Cut it at the base with a wide blade.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	 If you hold with both hands.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one whose shoulder forms afterwards, it is necessary that you first cut round to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate thread, and treat until it is healthy again.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that occur with joint assembly happen by birth, or from a wound's healing process, or from the scorching of fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 If it is necessary to treat that swelling, so that the wound heals according to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 then place between two pads or cloths soaked in oil of roses, ensuring they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 or you put between two thin pieces of parchment while the wound is swollen, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the dislocation comes to either one of its sides with the palm, cut that swelling accordingly as it ought to be.
des vils	 If you are afflicted by evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 These are large sores wrapped and filled with excessive melancholy fluid, which come upon various body parts;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 and more often occurs in the legs of those who walk on stone and work hard, than elsewhere.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you provide no excrement removal at all times, and then the basilica washing of it.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment with iron is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 one is that it's cut and the black blood drained.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 And the other way is to lift the vein, and pull it entirely taut.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The cutting is thus according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 The first leg arises with very hot water, until the large without is sufficiently softened, then hold the leg on the patient's thigh from the hip to the area above the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 Then cut the vein in one place or two or three, with a wide incision, then extract and pull out the black blood into your hand from top to bottom until such quantity as the virtue of the sick can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 And then tie it off, and instruct them to be dyed with black meats.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And begin evacuation and healing when veins are clear, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The movements of his limbs follow this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Raise the limb of the patient if there is much hair, then give him a bath, and warm his leg in hot water until it turns red, causing veins to swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 And if you don't have hot water, heat it over fire and then wrap the veins with long cloth at the top of the knee or in the area above the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 Then cover it with cowhide and scrape off the veins from both sides until you can feel them under your fingers.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or passes through skin, it appears as a frayed rope.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then remove the shaft from underneath the skin, until it is fully withdrawn, and then tie off at the incision site lightly, then cover in another place above three days.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the skin around the wound until it appears raw, then lift the edges as you have done before, and tie off at another incision site similarly.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then make another cut or more if needed, then lift it, and wrap around the two pieces of skin, then pull tight up to the second cut.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then extract from incision to incision until it is completely removed, then bandage.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 If you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a strong, double-threaded needle through it entirely, tie the thread securely, push up from underneath the armor, and turn your hand back and forth until it slips out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And ensure that it does not tear, for if it tears, you cannot pull or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have completely pulled it out, place a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on the wound site.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And dress (treat) until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the vein is twisted and wrapped together and not straight, as we have said, it must be cut lengthwise, but do not seal it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And the treatment is as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The form of iron used to pierce the vein should be curved and not sharply pointed so that it does not cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 and is of considerable thickness because if it were too fine, it would cut the vein; however, let it be large as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	 Of civilized veins.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein should be located in the legs, warm areas or places where no plants or trees grow and on dry land without any moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 and perhaps it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which occurs from putrefaction that comes out of the skin like it happens within the body serpents and worms, embedded between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of this vein's beginning are such that a great swelling comes to the leg, then the limb changes, and begins to bleed out, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the head is open, it must be wrapped with two pieces of linen about three to four fingers wide along the leg, and leave the swathe in place each time there's no issue.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, cut off a portion, and wrap the remainder, but do not cover it completely at its root until it has fully come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 because if you cover it, it may re-enter the wound and cause an abscess or decay, and bring about a bad illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 for this reason it must be treated little by little until the head is fully out, leaving nothing or flesh behind.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 and anytime this vein is treated with V or X hands lengthwise, a man came to me after it had been X hands long. When you cut it, it bleeds out one finger or more, and is pierced all the way down to the bottom, so everything flows out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 And let the matter inside be emptied, and restore it with poultices and medicinal herbs for a certain number of days, then treat as abscesses are.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And never strike at this vein with hands or instruments, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or ankle, and much blood flows out.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 then treat as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 From worms that arise between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This illness is known in our land as 'ox disease' because it often occurs within veins and consists of a small worm that develops between skin and flesh, traveling up and down the body. The patient feels intense discomfort from limb to limer wherever the worm goes until it pierces the skin where it moves, releasing powerfully.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And it is caused by putrefaction of some bodily fluids, as worms and snails and ascarids or belly come.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And there is doubt about its harmfulness, because when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance entering, and destroying the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you see it need to be drained or milked, one cannot stop it when it occurs:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 Therefore it is necessary that you bind the area above and below a strong joint tightly, then cut away some flesh and squeeze out fluid, and if he vomits up everything in his stomach, cauterize with fire on top until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 The greatest harm it causes is that it runs the vein, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 and if you see it coming or near the vein, grip its eyebrow firmly, then cut around it, and tie off.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 And the patient must use the cleansing of body parts with soluble medicines for bad humors and wash with rotten meats to purify it.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain arising from inflammation of blood vessels
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This illness is known in our land as "Vakirir," and causes pain that moves from one limb to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 and I tell you what I see.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to an unwell woman, and discovered swollen arms, with a small inflammation in the veins of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 Shortly afterward, the vein rises just as a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything else, like quicksilver when it jumps from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain disperses in that place, and shifts to the shoulder, and then shortly after spreads throughout the entire body, until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then he told me that it turned around within the body, as I have seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	they:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 Nevertheless, I had wanted to ensure that the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and exposed veins, so appeared those vapors of constraint.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And they do not appear following this reason for those who are paralyzed, and who have wet bodies and veins restored.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it manifests as we have said, then remove both above and below swiftly, and then close until the swelling subsides back into place.
et cauterize le leu;	 and cauterize at the site.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat as you would stinky pills and soot pills, along with similar remedies.
des saiettes	 Of arrowheads
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearances and the places on the body where they emerge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The variety of them is such that there are some with large points, and small, and hairy, and smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And of those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are breaks.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and that which flows in no limb if it leaks by any means:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or in the principal member (the arm), like the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it flows in no part of these members, the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter become apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 if it must be that you attempt the extraction of this arrowhead, for death comes in various forms thereafter;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 and when these bad signs do not become apparent, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then try to extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 When the arrowhead enters and pierces the bone, causing a cerebral blow that affects the brain, resulting in hemorrhage, swelling, pressure, redness of the eyes, inflammation, tongue redness, mental confusion, and bile vomiting.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 And sometimes without strength in the nose or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 And occasionally affecting speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 The wound with white moist flesh resembling hairs, and healing like the redness of coal.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 If these signs appear to you, provide treatment, and remove the arrowhead if it is not deeply embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The signs of the arrow when it enters or exits are as if they were close to the left breast, feeling as though it had been embedded in a hard object, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And sometimes it moves like hairs do, resulting in black blood coming out, accompanied by chills and cold sweat, leading to fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 Then he has doubt that death will come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrowhead is that there are no traces in the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes complexion, and breathes deeply and seeks cold water.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if the arrow falls into a cavity near the ribs, it is close to small intestines;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and pours out much blood and causes great pain and sighing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 and they move all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	heuze d; 1 (h: they s of gk: MDP.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrow pierces the belly and does not burst out through the intestines, there is no hope in treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if the arrow falls into the bladder, causing it to leak and frequent urination, the patient feels strong pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 You say that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, depending on how they are made and the collarbone and throat and shoulder and upper arm and spine and ribs and hips, and similar parts, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 It happened to a man whose arrow fell just below the eye socket near its root:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I tried it, and on the other side removed the grease from the ear, and was found to be completely healed.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And he removed an arrow from the fat of the ear below the skin and paper, and the arrow was reinserted, but could only reach the tip towards its base, and it was a large Turkish bow without any iron except for the ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The joint was healed, and nothing adverse occurred to him again.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an Arabic bow with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I dealt with the Saracens and carefully handled it as much as I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And when an arrow is lodged in one's body, where it has reached the belly, thinking that he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and then after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut near the arrow, skillfully manipulated it, successfully withdrew it, and there was no harmful outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And if you see a person to whom an arrow has fallen on the back, and his wound is freshly dressed above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 and if the arrow remains within him, not disrupting his natural state or causing harm in any of his natural functions;
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And when you see another man to whom an arrow has fallen on the face, and his wound is dressed above;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and it remains in such a way that they suffer great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	 And many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And he suffered from an arrow in his forehead among the nobles at the king's court, which was somewhat tilted to the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 and the arrow was fully embedded (or 'set back').
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I went for treatment after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I removed it with all subtlety and did not feel anything (or 'it didn't hurt').
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 and there was no pricking or pain from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was the tip of the arrow that caused this. So I applied a warm poultice with soothing and digestive properties because his eyes were not swoln.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 and then it seemed to me that it was an arrow wound.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 The next day I applied the embolaster to his hands and thoroughly dressed the wound, allowing the patient to endure thus for a long time until he felt the arrow in his nose.
et il le me dist.	 And then he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I applied the medicinal acid to the wound until it was healed, and tested it, feeling the head of the arrow dissolving in place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 then I reinforced the opening of the wound with that medicinal acid until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 and it traversed fully within four months, then I loosened the edges which I had clamped with pincers, on both sides, but could not be removed.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Then I ceased to subtly and ingeniously devise methods of reduction, until one day it was taken in hand well-made pincers, according to the form that will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it, and return the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And they judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 Then I shall reset it accordingly, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 And I have told you the quality of arrow extraction, so that you may focus your care on what I do not mention here, for the book cannot cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 but the wise master physicians say a little about many things and that which is present and failing, nine works are done, and nine instruments are used in dealing with strange matters arising in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows do not exit from limbs where they are deeply embedded but according to two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 or through the same opening or by another way.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and that which exits where it entered is an arrow entering living flesh, and never exits more than once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not exit now, let it remain as long as the flesh is rotting around it, and be swollen at the point of entry.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And similarly if it is lodged in the bone and cannot exit, let it remain so for several days, moving slightly each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And then if it exits, and if not, make a very fine hole around it until the flesh is loosened, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 When the arrowhead is embedded in the bone of the skull and approaches one of the brain's cavities, and some of the incidents I have mentioned above afflict the patient.
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If it cannot be drawn out but left until it is even after some days, for if the arrowhead reaches this point, it causes death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrowhead is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the fascia, and the patient remains without any harm for several days, then proceed with attempting to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed thusly, administer remedies around it as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound until it is sound.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if the arrowhead is back in its place within the body so that one cannot see it, then wrap all around it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 And if you feel it, use any suitable instrument to remove it.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 And if you cannot for stretching the wound, and piercing deeply into the arrowhead, there being no bone or nerve or vein, then bleed as long as the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 And treat the arrowhead if you can, and if it has ears on which it grips, then apply a sticking plaster that is firmly set in two parts to what you can move, and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead as much as you can.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And subtly ensure that you do not break the arrowhead, but pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, lift up to the nearest resting place and then draw it, as pulling might relieve the strain of extraction.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if bleeding occurs in the opposite direction, apply as we have said of treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And watch over the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a method as you would draw out an arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And place the patient as they were when the arrow fell on them, for that is the greatest help you can provide; and if you cannot do so, then place them according to what their signs indicate to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow that comes from another direction, or where there is no visible injury, or the skin is swollen in that area if you can see or feel it distinctly.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Therefore cut accordingly as long as the pincers can grip, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If it is still present now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if [the arrowhead] is caught in the bone, twist your round hand, until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot exit, let it remain for now, then resume extraction until it fully comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 and if the arrowhead remains in place, remove it entirely from the body.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 and if it comes loose while administering the cautery, if you use a tool with a sharp point, then the tip of the arrowhead enters into the handle of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 and then remove it entirely; if the arrow is loose, put the tool with an inward-pointing tip to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if the arrowhead pierces or hits the belly or bladder or ribs and is recent, you must apply pressure there.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And guard against puncturing the vein and nerve, then extract it, then close the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And continue the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and this one looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 large, various, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowheads.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the forked beard is also like that of a bird's feather, to thrust at the tip of the arrowhead, as here shown.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pincers for pushing and probing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 There are veins to be opened numbered thirty-one, from which sixteen heads emerge, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 Two battens located behind the ears, called "herbecs":
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 And two arteries visible in the temple areas:
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 And two veins located in the upper lip area of both lips, called "aspiers":
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 And the vein that is above the forehead:
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 And the veins that are near the neck.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 And the two nerves which are there, above.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 And the veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are called "aquae ducts.";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 And two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins of which there are five in each arm commonly found:.
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 One is the cephalic one, and it's on the left side, called "the principal vein" or "voinnes du chef".;
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 And the middle one is called "fast", and it's composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, referred to as "the body's vein" by some. ;
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 And the basilic vein is on the right side, called "the belly's vein", and it's above the fossa, clearly visible near the armpit when observed. ;
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the savior is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it has two heads.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 and in the leg where there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 one is from below the hollow of the left breast muscle, and the second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle joint.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 and the vein called "nesse," that is in the ankle of the other leg.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 and on the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The pain from the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 Et the quality of the ointment, as I have told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub their head or veins with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 Then tighten the neck of the patient with a tourniquet so that the two veins appear behind the ears at two levels depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 Afterward take hold of them by your thumbs and where you feel hair growing from above your thumbs, be careful.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lancet, and insert it just above the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein towards its origin, cut through both sides of the skin tract, ensuring clear cutting of the vessel, allowing blood to flow as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then strain and bind it until it is well aligned;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have already mentioned the incision and caustic in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The cleaning of the two veins that are in both temples, if they have been swollen for a long time, and hardened, and ulcerated from habitual use, and cause tears to flow on the sides.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 and the quality of such cleaning is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it's that the patient must stretch their neck so that both veins are clearly visible.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and they feel pain under your thumbs, then tie them off.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then lift the skin over the vein under your index finger and insert the lancet below it, and lift the vein upward, and tie it off, just as you did with the other two veins, and bleed according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 Then dislocate the patient's limb, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place a cotton pad.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is cleaned.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 And we have spoken of their comforting and extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The cleansing of the veins in the forehead is worth as much as the cleansing of the cerebral vessels for ancient face diseases, and migraines, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 then take the instrument called "auger," whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the point over the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then loosen the patient's neck and bind the vein so that it is straight and not widened with any cloth or bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 However, it must never be too tightly wrapped.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 and the vein is twisted, because the bone is near, and by chance it may break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The veins in the two forearms should be tied up at the elbows, wrists, and joints, and with skin conditions on the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 and the condition of their veins should be such that the patient loosens his neck by twisting any bonds.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then cleanse it, and let the wound heal completely with some length of fine thread that is somewhat wide, as there is no need to tighten.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the sutures are delicate, they may sometimes tear;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 then apply sufficient blood to what is needed, and then cover with gauze, and wrap it securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The healing of the wound is not to be hindered by cold or sweat, and other skin diseases such as migraines and rashes that occur on the face, especially when it's longstanding.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 and the quality of healing is such that the patient should strain their neck, then extend it with your left hand, and take some delicate suture lengthwise, and insert it into the space between the two nostrangs, because the vein does not open well by itself, and blood will begin to flow now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And do not go too far with it, and follow correctly along the blood according to your need, then let her rest one night, for she is often quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 And this is the form of the phlegm:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The bandaging of the II joints assists in stretching of the limbs, and at the onset of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and erosion, and herpes, and itchiness.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 and the quality of the bandage is that the patient must remove its head from both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 and the master stands above the head of the patient, and the patient cuts slightly over one seat, then let the vein bleed a little bit widely, then stop the blood timely, or as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 Then redo on the other side of the vein, then realign the joints, and compress the veins moderately so that the patient is not strangled.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And leave it until morning, that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the liver ailment called jaundice
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleaning of lice from the lips helps to clear infection in the mouth, and gum disease, and cracks on the lips, and bad breath and itching.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And the quality of healing depends on making the patient sit in front of you and tightening their neck as I have described.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the lip and look at the veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they can be identified by their blackness and the small dark vessels around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 So do both, and if you do not recognize them or have doubts, cut the larger one from each side, and likewise with all the veins above and below, as it is of the same kind.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of the jaundice underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The blood of the veins that are below the tongue is assisted after the bleeding from the head, and it's through the extension of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 and its quality of bleeding is such that the patient cuts between his hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Then you should bleed both [veins], but not too much at once, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins of the elbow that we commonly bleed are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 or by gripping all of the forearm firmly wide apart, or with an olive-shaped and sharp instrument like scissors; called "anchisile.";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 And they are wide and subtle according to the width and extension of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of this mistletoe plant is much renowned and very broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And it is necessary to open clear veins with visible blood, and that contain much blood and impurities;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 and this is the form of an olive bubble:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is finer pointed, and meant for collecting subtle veins, where there is a subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The vessel of the veinous network, which is one of these veins, helps in diseases that are from under the throat, and neck, and sides, and belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And it is fitting for the vessel to be filled adequately, and that it cleanses from the artery which lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if he pierces the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it should be stopped, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And it must not be pierced by the flame, but cut as one shears.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the vein does not open clearly, you should extract it and use another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 or if you wish to avoid any blood from it, or you find it in place within the arm vein:
elle apert manifestement;	 it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 and the vessel is sheared by flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you know the place of the vein, then as I instructed you to extract it and move away the arm, touch its location until you feel the hairs.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 Then signify the place with a mark, and then lay the arm, and shear the vein by flame as one shears.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 And ensure you do not injure the artery when you see it swollen, for it is the artery.
eschui la donques.	 Then escape quickly.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see it protruding upwards like a child's urine, and the wound is red and slender, know that it is from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Haste yourself away, extend your leg fully, then remove the object if jammed, as often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 If the arm is involved, leave it thus, and do not move the patient's limb.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And be in fear, and do not move the limb until it is safe.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the wound is not blocked and it bleeds, and there are no medicines at hand, clot the artery should it open, for the head of the limb retracts.
et estainche li sans.	 And he becomes numb.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And take a slice of pine resin and heat it, then select one half and apply it until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 if he is numb, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that numb the blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 and the numbing is not harmful in most cases for a slight location of the wound, and possible flexibility at the joints of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The cleaning of the vein helps in bleeding from above and below because it is composed of basilica and cerebral substances, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 and it behooves the saigneror to wash out the nerve beneath it, and if too much is taken, and they sever the nerve, which swells and causes severe pain, and perhaps cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then you should sanitize the instrument carefully.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 And remove the nerve with your hand.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is no touch it the veuine, then they are l'a cauterisee.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The cerebral sinus helps, attracting blood to the head, and aids the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 It is customary to heal in pinching the flax oil or myrtle vein, as it's the most effective of all leeches, because there are no nerves or arteries there.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 Nevertheless, one must seek the lighter ones and avoid causing pain during the first treatment, then repeat it.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And sometimes it enlarges the glands in some men when doing it for the first time, but does not cause pain.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is according to your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you must know about healing is that the cure is not performed soleebut to maintain health and prevent future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And there shall be the sinew made within one of the three veins mentioned above.
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 This is to know, cephalic, saphenous, and basilica [vein types].
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And it should be sinewed at the beginning of summer and autumn after eating, and in winter when signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 And it should be sinewed on the first day or third, two hours or three days later.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The sinew treatment for diseases has no set time, but when needed is by day or night, at all hours and always.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And it does not require sinewing for children up to fourteen years old, nor women pregnant in their seventh month onward.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not let them raise their hands who are old, those who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 When anyone wishes to heal themselves in any way, it is necessary that they clear the intestines with a gentle enema if there is much feces retained so that excessive waste does not harm the main body parts.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 Not even those who are too fat from meats or drunkards, no matter how severe their condition may be.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 and heal after suffering from colic, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent intercourse with women or men, insomnia, waking up often, and whatever else weakens the body, whether by a thing of the weapon or in the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 then subtly remove the humors if it is heavy with meats and drinks and medicines, provided that you have them to spare.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then use a bath if nothing hinders it to refine the blood and cleanse the vein around the area of the third finger as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And protect yourself from work, pain, lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 Be bound and elevated, and the healer's hands should be higher than that which is being treated, then rub the arm two or three times, then gently remove the bandage for a moment because if it is too tight or too loose, one cannot cure it properly.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 Then rub the limb with hands until the veins swell and he can feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then moisten the healer's fingers with a small amount of old oil, then place his thumb from his left hand over that vein below the limb slightly or as much as he wishes to treat, so that the vein does not break upon striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 There are veins that flee like strings in the bow, and some of these that are hollow from windiness. And when you place it over fire, it recedes to fire without being able to open the vein, thus such cases occur.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if it works on the vein, and the wound is too narrow, so one must have skilled archers knowledgeable in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the arrow works once, it's good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 But if not, then try again a little from where he was or with haste, unless the wound is swoln.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 But if the wound is swollen and the patient hopes, let him rest for one or two days without binding the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 By chance, they may come upon abscesses with caustics.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 If it pleases him, he should not enter or bathe, then resume the washing.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 And if the projectile is small, or the wound is subtly deep and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, then cauterize the same opening throughout the entire edge.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 And quickly perform the procedure, so that the eye may swell.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 Because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the eye swelling, do not resume washing immediately, and place a little bit of oil mixture there, because it will ease their body with gentle blood flow, and is healing in this place as if by the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And so administer oil in each wound to stop the veins, in order to staunch the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 and likewise make a truss and bandage when it is put on the limb;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 if subtlety he slips out and spreads apart when too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if it comes to large abscesses, which often happen, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you rush, place a moist sponge in warm water and salt on the limb for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 and it is necessary to do this afterwards when the blood has drained from the vein, and if there remains at the limb for several days any blackness or green discoloration, then it harms not.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see it, apply on any matter of ointment or balm made with wormwood, myrrh, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And often an abscess and the appearance of a sore within the church occurs.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 So place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot hard to compress with your hand, that is the male appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Therefore avoid applying anything as we have mentioned, for there might be an artery in this vein;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 but make the wound dry with poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each of the four humors according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 Because if the vein is black, allow it to bleed until it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 And if you see it large, let it remain until it becomes subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 And if it is too hot, allow it to cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And for those who are thin and weak, and in need of bloodletting, they make a wider wound, and the veins are wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and strengthen him little by little, and he should be strengthened by cutting across, not pulling.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And this way of strengthening is safe from blood flow disruption and nerve compression, and it's better to move the limb little by little than quickly or widely.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And for those whose body requires strengthening, one should give them millet bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If it is inflamed, wash three times or four; and if it has a cold disposition, serve the holy bread moistened in syrup mixed with honey, or sweet syrup enhanced with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If the patient's limb is numb after a great loss of blood, it is necessary that he drinks boiled wine mixed with charcoal and fragrant syrup, and uses other remedries as we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if you wish to drain his arms, and otherwise bandage again as needed when they are greatly swoleby moisture so that he may be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his humors continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	they lete and t; (fudse ; but.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to heal on another side, shall do so on the second day or third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 For there is much blood within the body that has become inflamed, leading to fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 if it requires drawing a large quantity of blood and dilating the vein as much as possible;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 then you attend to all the holy conditions and place your hand over them as soon as they heal, that death does not come in the area of inflammamoines, and this often happens when the caretakers are neglectful;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it does not matter when you see dislocating the arm, causing blood to bleed a second time, and the orifice is closed, so press firmly above.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 If it is an artery, extend the arm quickly, for that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 but let it drain until it bleeds a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 or you insert the pointed instrument there until the blood vessel is frozen at the abscess and allows for drainage, and place slightly in water again, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is empty, leave it alone and do not bind it until the abscess is eased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if bleeding is necessary a second time, either from the same place or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	and do they pus mete s’er in:t that f, or cite:
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the manner of draining should be that the patient places their hand in hot water until the catheter turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 then bind it moderately, so that the vessel appears well, then drain now across, neither wide nor long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And let the wound be wide, and well near the joint of the hand, and without any exit, reset the hand in warm water, and allow blood to flow into it until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And if this is the case, do not reset the hand in warm water again, because it becomes more frozen than thawed.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And this vein of this wound is easier to save than all others; there are no arteries or nerves present.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The vessel of the salvation of the right hand is suitable for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Stretch the hand, and place in warm water until the veins are flushed out, if you see them.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 If she leans to one side, and if you encircle it completely all around, then do not harm anything.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 And do not move it too much, for the nerves are barely covered by skin, and then rewarm the hand in hot water, if it is frozen in the wound, it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as needed, put oil and grease on the vein to quickly bind it, and do this with each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The pain in his left hand is due to the mouse disease, and do as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The treatment of sophia is suitable for all diseases from the body such as those similar to hip disease, and retention of urine, and kidney disease, and old ailments of hips and legs, and other like diseebeds.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of its injury is such that the patient must be soaked in hot water and rubbed on the wound until it softens, and then placed over the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 and if the wound is at the ankle, there are many cuts above the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 cleanse it or make the incision wider, or at the anasto-liteau, let it heal.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you touch on the bone above the foot, beware of the nerves that are below it, and treat the wound as in cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 Then make the phlegm silent (stop).
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sinew cannot exit, place the foot in water and ensure that the vein empties well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And if the wound does not heal on the first attempt, it may start to heal from above a little bit again, because the bone is sore.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Do not doubt of nerves as we have said, and thus apply a bandage to the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The root of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its inflammation causes pain in the hip when it's hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of healing is such that the patient must be kept in or out of a bath, and pull away from the ankle with four fingers by twisting, otherwise it does not open the veins.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 And if it opens, then cleanse in every way that you can, and across (the wound).
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And to move it again you must grab it, for the head is loose, and it has been restored much by hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you do not catch it, take any piece that is attached to it or at the back of the knee, and towards the small hole, and watch for nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 and make a precise cut in the blood you see, then sever the ligament, and apply cotton and strain it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 And of suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Vents are made of horns, or ivory, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 and suctioning is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this suctioning that is done without piercing has two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 When she feels feverish, or shows signs of heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 And bloodletting which is done by cupping and blood extraction if performed on fourteen points of the body, causing one to be completely bald.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 And the other is near the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 And two others are on the sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 And cupping below the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 And cupping at both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 And cupping on the heels.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 And cupping near both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 And cupping at both legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 And cupping at both ankles.
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 And bloodletting does not involve much blood loss, but rather tiny veins scattered throughout the body, and therefore no one suffers as with normal venesection.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And it is not necessary that she be treated with heat or any burning, in no disease arising from congestion until the whole body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And if for the necessity of diseases it is necessary to fast, or by custom, we shall observe each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 because there are some who, when they need to fast, experience heavy weakness;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 and for those who encounter congestion and paleness in their face, head, neck, and darkness of the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 and those who experience blood spitting into their mouths, with a swollen tongue, and coughing up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if there are those who think, and see now blood and nausea and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is within the month, we order to evacuate after three hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The saint remedy for the muscle helps to strengthen the head... which comes from them, and it is not advisable that this be done after the evacuation of all body fluids.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 And this purging is in place of the remedy for headache, and it should not be used by those who are of cold constitution or have catarrh, as it causes them much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And therefore, the vigorizing substance should not be used by those who suffer from cold head ailments.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often get better become negligent, and therefore it is advised to apply the cupping therapy somewhat more cautiously due to fear of relapse.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 Purging in the neck is effective for headache and uterine pain relief, and it also helps with urination issues, enlargement of the penis, ejaculation difficulties, and engorgement.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 And it is necessary to push a little, for if held too firmly, there may be discomfort or distress in the abdomen and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 For treatments such as ribs at the base of the collarbone if it causes pain in the head, otitis and migraines, strangulation, and pain in the root of teeth, and is located near the sacredness of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And it is necessary to command the nurse to extend his hand, not to compress the artery and prevent bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 For treatments from under the chin if it causes oral diseases and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And is located near the sanctity of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause illnesses arising from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The swelling of the elbows is as much as from three veins on the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 And instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply because the bone is full of cartilage and has veins and arteries running through it.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The ventose placed on the buttocks is equivalent to hemorrhoids in the lower part and diseases underneath, it is necessary for the ventose to be large and made of flax, as it requires proper extraction.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 and sometimes, if it were too fine, it could break;
et i fai grans plaies.	 and it would cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The ventoses on the legs draw blood openly because they attract blood from all over the body and are equivalent to old pains of the kidneys, groin, and bladder, and reset the flows.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 And they are in place of two shoulders and two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and bring about swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The manner of applying the blister is to first place it empty and apply it promptly, then secure it quickly, moving evenly, and continue this motion until you see the area turn red and swell, and a small amount of blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then rest, and replace the blisters, and monitor the condition of the body, as there are those who have scalding heat and clear sweat.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 If it is necessary to make an incision just once, and it needs to be a wide and somewhat deep wound;
et suce legierement.	 And gently move.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the wound is large, it must be pierced twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time to make a path for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the wound is very dense, it must be pierced three times:
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 and when we want to draw out little blood at a time, we do so only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want a lot of blood, let us repeat often:
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 and if the wound is dense, pierce it from afar, and finish so that the holes are punctured directly, and for those with thick and hard skin, let them use the lancets of oily aromatic oil and dissolvent:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 if it is so, with purple oil or almond softening oil or pumpkin seed oil:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if it is in oil of watercress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amartine or balm of Gilead, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 If one whom you treat has a tender and broad chest, there is no need to put oil on it, but after ventosation with rose water or cold water, or blackthorn water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should get up easily, or use myrtle water, and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those who have large excess fluids rise with old wine, or of watercress water, or of fennel or chamomile infusion, or similar substances.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 and they should not fasten the bladder with a cupping session before or during the bath, but after the bath one or two hours.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 and they should not sleep after cupping therapy, and it is necessary that they bathe when they need to be cupped and after being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And let those who are prone to constipation take this, and their stool is too hard and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 If it is necessary to apply cold things such as ripe pomegranates and endives and lettuce at ease, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 and mince pieces, and lard of bacon, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And those with cold constitutions should take honeyed syrup and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, a little mince meat, minced pieces, small birds, and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 and each day when he refreshes himself, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 and it is appropriate to give certain individuals triacle or muskat before the incision or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 and ensure they are filtered, but only those who are ill should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The ventouses that are applied without using heat are those placed over the liver, and joints such as gout, podagra, and also on the abdomen, buttocks, knees, and elbows, because these members cannot be pricked in any place, and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the nipples when they are not well.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 To remove the swelling in the limb, as we apply ventouses to the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the size of the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 And alleviate the pain when there is congestion or stone, and if possible draw it out by its attracting power occasionally the congestion, or remove the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And thus it is done when placing it over the liver and spleen where there is retained windwassering, and these blisters are made hollow to drain sufficiently.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And they are not made together with fire, and never flat from water, as in the case of diseases causing pleurisy, and thus you fill the blister with hot water poultice or warm water after boiling medicinal herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with heat is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And it must be two fingers wide and half a palm thick at the base, with a small hole near the middle like piercing with a needle, and made of woolen cloth so that it does not slip off when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 And have at hand a staff of crossbar from reed or iron, to place a candle holder, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 Because children's bloodletting vessels are different from adults', and thin rather than fatty.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And one should thus place this bleeding vessel on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 take the candle of wax or ointment, and place it amidst the bleeding vessel across the crossbar which is midst the bleeding vessel, so that its glow reaches to the bottom of the vessel without burning the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 and then place it upon the limb, and your fingers should be above the puncture site as we have said, so that when one wishes, steam will arise, and the bleeding vessel is removed.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And straighten it as before, and often repeat if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the cupping therapy used for diseases of pleurisy, there is neither a rod nor tube, and it's only made when filled with liquid, and placed on the limb.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is how it works:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Cupping therapy is only applied to limbs where regular cups cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 And for other bare areas like the scalp or neck.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 And the quality of use is that when you find cups filled with gently flowing clear liquid, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 And they place it on an acute wound with gentle warmth until it becomes familiar, and has nothing in its belly.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 And then apply bandages of veins and compresses, then rub the limb until it is reddened, and place poultices on it.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are full and ready to burst, if there is a place where one can apply compresses, then do so, for it works very well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, lift the swelling gently and then apply water, very thoroughly, and then squeeze it out.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the limbs are not too sore to touch after applying poultices, then apply a clean linen cloth soaked in cold water and place it on, until the swelling is reduced.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if blood is multiplied, put it on crushed vitriol or gallnuts, and similar things, until it stops.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Or you put a half-moon of peeled beans on it and let them sit until they become dry, thus stopping now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if more is needed, then take other medicines.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the medicines do not take hold, then rub the blood freshly and insert a needle until it stops bleeding, and then place them on top of each other, and as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they are leaking, then powder some aloe and silex broken or ash upon it, and they will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These treatises are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they restore broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Learn this, dear scribe, that the foolish seeker delves into this chapter, never having seen any ancient books or letters read.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 and for this reason is strange knowledge in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 and I know nothing else, though by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I am familiar with the subject, through experience, and by habit throughout my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of tumors that are created, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say that the preamble of this book contains the essence and wisdom of its chapters, so those who are experienced apply their understanding to truth, allowing them to know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs to any limb, it is necessary for you to support the injured part on both sides if nothing completely supports them, as in weakness of arms, children, or old people.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 If the tension is not too great, or too cold.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 And consume cold foods such as cold joints of meat, and fowl or veal, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you are no longer doubtful about a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 If the patient's condition returns to its first state that they previously used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that cause swelling or viscosity, such as boiled wheat, rice, eggs, beans, veal, chicken, fresh fish, and strong wine, along with similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	When with gradual dislocation, movement is soon followed by fractures.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that broken and old bones cannot be well mended or joined according to their natural character for healing of limbs, nor those as well who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 But do not worry, reset over the broken bone with strong tendons that are taut and join the limb together, until it is as strong as before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And do not leave all his work undone, and for this reason he must nourish himself with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	by the bolejles Que c; If you say b: OU; ça finge t m and so et se ou n'ilz ne bon line: Ca: Jarn’s.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When the break of the head is different from the break of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that go with rotation, and others by bending, as the length of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture accompanied by a tiny split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And each person has his own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind in their place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 and is known the bone fracture by how it is twisted, and opened widely at the break, near to the press of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 and when there is no twist or touch it, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But it may well have twisting, or tearing, or small breaking.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move your hand at all, but apply the medicines that come next and then gently hold it in place.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And know that if the breakage protrudes outward and the two parts are disjoined, they must now be aligned evenly, as with abscesses when they come forth.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 and if abscesses occur, leave it untouched until the abscess is calmed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 then make it equal to movements that you can gently and easily perform, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than those with missing parts.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 then bind it as necessary later on.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 And if the bone is broken into pieces and consists of two parts, whether hands or feet, or to your hand with small limbs, or to both tendons, or to one tendon and to your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 And place the limb according to its natural shape. So when the parts of the broken limb are severed, carefully realign them using all methods to put the fractures back in their places as you can move them, and ensure that with your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And well align the two heads of bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And feel carefully with your hand if it seems that they are not aligned properly:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If the dressing is done well, and do not extract it too much or press as those who cause abscesses hot and contracture in the member have witnessed many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the limb is at a standstill, treat the patient well so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, or in any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For when it feels no pain, not even slightly, and one must place it in such position that it feels no pain at all.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 and ensure that it is placed correctly, so there are no twists when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 and the quality of the broken limb should be according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	; forment the c; The Chir, they so that is: corue me: the Juda de laise:n't. Do not to a. Preter. Here: theu said; in this t.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small bones, such as ribs and thighs:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 If needed, wrap soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 and those that are large, like thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 If needed, wrap with a wide and sturdy bandage because the wide bandages encompass the entire large limb evenly, without any unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then lie wraps light gauze, three or four times around the limb, and secures it with a little bit of the entire bandage, then goes above the fracture and tightens less than the fracture site, gradually moving away from the fracture.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 And gently loosen the bandage little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy portion, then take another wrap and turn around correctly above the broken area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 Then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it gently, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then place between the splints linen or cloth so that they are all equal, then bind everything above it with bandages, and then place well-made supports underneath, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on the abscess heat and which draws out the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Then restrain with your supports, and they should be a piece of cloth cut one hand's width wide, or wood used for making battens, or coconut fibers, according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 But it is necessary for the splint placed over the break to be a bit thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 and also as long as needed for the member, whether small or large in size;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then fasten between the splints just as you did on the first one, and above with a thread quickly, like in the first plastering over the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 the tighter it is above, the less there will be.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and it must be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 because if the thread is too thick, like the work of those who twist flax for linen cords, it causes great error, as the plaster cannot be evenly distributed if it's too fine, and there should not be less than two spaces between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the shoulders of their extremities after being strained into place, then apply cotton or raw wool rags beneath them so they do not slip.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the head is broken, I will tell you the remedy for this below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not happen to pull out all the bones of a limb broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 When limbs are large, it is not necessary to apply stitches unless after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the risk of an abscess occurring.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 And use here the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting injuries:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And take flour that is kept near the mill walls and mix it with abundant egg, then create this concoction, which should not be too clear or too thick, and use it; this is the common method of plaster for restoring fractures in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another way of plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting injuries:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take lion's blood, aloeswood, onions, asafetida, gum arabic, and myrrh, one part each.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Mirror and aloes, five parts each.
alechil VIIII З.;	 Alecsei VII, nine parts each.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 And make powder, and the honey with wheat flour;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 If the body's constitution is hot, use this emplaster, for it has good composition and quickly repairs broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another way of an emplaster that works well with sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Take linseed and wool fleece, soaked for X hours.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Mirri oil and aloe, soaked for IX hours.
acaice VI З.;	 Here comes the first of six chapters;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 And here begins the first of six parts; it is boiled and well mixed with water or whey, and given to drink.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another method for treating dislocated joints and bones that have come out of their place; it alleviates the pain occurring, and is used to cut through the bone and fracture.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take fresh linens, and make them soft with oil heated in it, and place on top of the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These plasters do not heal but are good to soothe of hot abscesses and properly alleviate the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another method to restore broken bones;
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves and leaves of the earthly poppy; grind them together, and make a poultice with it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to reset the healing of broken bones and reduce remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of valerian, chamomile flowers, violets' petals, and equal parts of wheat flour from each.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 And grind it, and crush with wine, and if the limb is swoln, then crush with fresh water of coriander or just water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way to treat more effectively than the first, when an abscess comes to heal the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take roots of valerian, and flax seeds, bladderwrack, poppy seeds, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, in equal parts.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 And grind it, then crush with salt water or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its resting state.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not put anything other than a mixture of wax and oil on a broken limb for healing, except if it is too soft or too hard between two layers.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems like Galen suggests that on a broken limb for healing, one should use dry substances that are somewhat warm, such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another way to treat injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Take mucus and sheep's liver, or feathers of birds, and valerian, in equal amounts; grind them, make a poultice, and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 And then slightly move it again afterwards, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has moved the bone from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 If so, do not attempt to relocate by hand alone.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if pain comes at the place, or itching, feeling of relief, or swelling occurs, hurry up and relocate it, and remove the splint now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 and take light gauze, and wipe with damp sponge, and immerse in cold water, and lift up the place, until itching ceases, and pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 then let the limb rest for an hour, and apply a dry linen or woollen cloth immersed in cold water or rose oil, and bind it to a stool until you are sure of heat from an abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 Rest the inflammation of the limb, and there is bone pain, then resume subtle movement, and a bit of plaster, and do not stretch it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And carefully until healed completely.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and warm and painful and swollen, and you need opiates and linen, then reset as before, similarly to how it was done initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if there is no improvement in the limb as we have said, do not reset it unless after three or four or five or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 and no more than twenty days as seen, until the fracture heals, approaching joint alignment with a charm underneath.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 then reset it firmly, and the flesh grows thicker as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 and if you see that the place dries too much, know that no infection can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Rise from warm water baths as you feel the need every day, and lightly dry yourself once a week.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 Therefore, in this practice, you should cut off the gangrenous tissue from the limb and quickly remove what fools do to wrongly set bones that twist the limb back on.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 It is harmful, and in such practices there is fear, I see no other than the lazy ones and those who work directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 There are many ways to fractures, diverse forms, and their causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the joints break through all the bone until the marrow comes out, just like with an axe or stick.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 And for this reason is called this manner of fracture "chiñure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or the sword pierces the bone above without sense and is called this manner of fracture "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 And there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impacted blow, crack, neck bone fracture, or fall onto the spine, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fissure that reaches the tunic which lies below or above the bone, where the wound may be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if there is a wound that closes in the bone as fine as a chamois's fur, and it is a small crack, and for this reason called this fracture "hairline";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 And if the wound is made by arrow strike or falling, or similar things, and causes the bone fragment to descend, it looks upwards as when smiths heat their forges.
si entre li piere dedens.	 If between the stones inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this occurs especially in those who have moist bones at their heads, as with children;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and it happens in all these ways of fractures where small parts are separated as elements;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all types of fractures by displacement underneath them, and the incisions on sinews, and by the corroded cartilage which is beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	And they; (et d do not as he sonte t and ous le trementd; that are the ou pr* est: S, so it.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, beware of accidents to the patient, and if you see any bad accident such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the suffering comes first to you, and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day when you can move it.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is like this, and you remove the bone within seven days, so that the tissue under the bone becomes corrupted, then come the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone fracture reaches near the cloth that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thusly:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 and it is that you grasp the wounded head firmly, and expose to the bone in all ways possible, and on top of the wound's appearance, as smoothly as you can, if bleeding occurs upon exposing the bangle or vein, aid with what is necessary, and ensure you fill up the space with scrapes soaked in oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, ensuring that the blood flow improves.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of treatment:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 One method is that you cut narrowly in front, which is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second method is that you have various cuts of different widths, some narrow and others wide, which are pointed, and made with iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 and work lightly so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 And if the bone is rough and hard, it is necessary that you perforate around it, making cuts with tongs, not too deep so they don't penetrate beyond the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point where it does not pass through the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 And it is necessary that you have several things at hand when each comes into its place on the edge of the bone, so that you may have tools for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 and there are the forms of three kinds of tools:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality for cutting near the bone broken is that you place one tool on the bone and turn it until you know the bone is cut.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 then place the tool elsewhere slightly afterward and do so all around it, and with the incisors cut out the space of the bone that is between the fractures, doing this more delicately than you can, gently, as we have said, until you pass through the bone to your hand or any one of the tongs that you have like pliers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 And ensure you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 And when you have pierced the bone and created an opening, it is necessary to reset the readiness that has been delayed from the bone to any other instrument resembling a chisel; however, it must be more careful and finer than the other chisel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 and if there is nothing delayed from the small bones or scales, gently move them with slight movements;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 Then treat the wound with sutures and ointments as we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks (Galinians) describe, which is more effective.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 and it holds much strength, and this is its nature.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose the bone part where the break opens up; and once you have exposed that part, then place atop the blade of this crescent-shaped incision tool, which has the following shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And does not cut cleanly on one side, as the affected area has swelling in two directions, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 then place a small mallet above it, so you tap lightly around the entire bone, and ensure you are careful not to damage the cloth that is underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 if it is loose near the bone, so you gently tap the bone, because we do not want to harm it much or cause fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce all the way through to the skin and is cut only from above, with small fragments remaining, you should attend to that sharpness again, and remove the scales with a fine razor in which various quantities must be used, so as to apply most appropriately to each location according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you approach from great heights, then proceed with more subtlety, and continue in this manner until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of these other haircut treatments and delicate fractures, it is necessary to reset according to its proper alignment.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 And this is something that has not been redone by those who have dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the patient's face is revealed, it is necessary to take a cloth of flax according to the amount of the wound, and oil with rosins, then apply to the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers and oil with wine and rosins, and place it over the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 And do so more gently as you can, not to burden the face, then apply above it another bandage, and do not tighten it too much until only the wound is covered.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then release it, and administer medicines as listed roots, flour of vetches, powdered incense, aristolochia, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And from these substances make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and administer such medicines without causing burning.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And guard that the wound is thus clean, not leaving any ointment or allowing a boil to form there, for when a boil forms on the tissue of the brain, it hurts and becomes inflamed, bringing great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 For when one applies something caustic there, it corrodes just below.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, should any unfortunate event occur to the patient as we have mentioned, it is doubtful and uncertain.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 If darkness does not come due to the medicine applied, and its power prevails, then it is necessary to take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and woolen cloth, and place it on the sore.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then care for in ways as needed until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Know that at no time are the two parts of the neck broken or separated by one from another, for they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 and that which is behind is cartilaginous and does not break or twist, it simply supports and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should tie your little finger or thumb behind the neck, and place the break equally into your index finger's knuckle, and use a pouch for safety until the neck returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do this gently, ensuring the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot bring the finger to its place, it is appropriate that you put a little bit of grease on the top of a small stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 And if the fracture is of two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the seventh or latest day, when the abscess has calmed down, then bind to the neck with narrow strips of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 Or you bind another from a different side, if the fracture is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 and the strips should be wide enough to fill the neck opening.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And each healer says one must grease the wounds with butter, and change it every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem right to me, but it is necessary that they be made from fine wool and flour powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then leave the tent intact as long as the bone is fixed, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And never place an eagle's feather in the tent opening, and if it is near the window screen, prevent any breakage, and blow air to repel foul smells.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 Or do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the patient while you work on it, then put some grease or cotton wool in oil roseate, or a small portion of diacron.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And if an abscess does not open, then apply plaster promptly: wheatmeal paste mixed with goose egg yolks and frankincense powder, then cover with light gauze, but do not bind the feathers.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 and if the feather breakage is minor, with small broken pieces, extract the spicules appropriately for this, then close the tear, and mend other irregularities such as charred or burned areas, and apply suitable plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he has no wounds in the eyes, treat with bandages and apply compresses of warmth until they are well again.
de la routure de la mandibule	From the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound, the fractures are not severe, nor are they broken in two, unless the inner part has swelled, which can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand, gently press the fracture, and shape it with the other hand as needed, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced by two joints, it should be that you make an adjustment with a length equal to the parts.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if there are movements of the axis or rotation, strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk, then place a padded cloth on the fractured jawbone, and cover it with two layers of fabric.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And place upon the drapelet a large well-made pillow, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and lay it along with movements that you can make, instructing the patient to rest, and serve light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the form changes, reset it daily for three days, then return it to its original position once changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 And apply an emplaster on top, with finely ground powder or flour from sorrel, after you have removed the catheter.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And place a light linen over the emplaster, and if the emplaster hurts, ensure that the patient's position does not change until healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 Many times are healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when abscesses appear, treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no piece of bone remains unhealed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 If the subtlety of the broken tibia has not healed yet.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, enlarge it gently according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have extracted all these pieces of bone and it no longer remains in the wound, then dress the wide wound, and place on fine stitches to close it up until it is healed.
de la forcele	(tirq; If: C.n's." est s.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The severe fractures occur many times before, at the shoulder, and the fractures are of three kinds:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 Or it is broken into two parts, with fragments, and it is the easiest to mend.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 Or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the treatments are such that when there is a fracture with a wound, you have two assistants, so one treats the shoulder that feels the severe fracture.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 And the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 Then make equal the break to your legs so that it forms as it should, with no visible deformity or discomfort.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend more, then place a round rod made of cloth or leather on the patient's shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And extend and lift with strength; hold the rod in your hand to ensure the break is evenly set as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation due to it coming in from the front, then it is fitting that the patient lies over their injured side, and places a middle-sized earring under the shoulder blade, while you, as minister, push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the dislocation rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 Then bring the break close to your legs and if you find fragments, cut them below as needed.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 Then lightly grind the pieces and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, use one of your surgical tools.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 But place the scapula with this instrument to support it:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 And appears like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the hand:
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 And has two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the edges of the wound made when fracturing the bone:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the edges are small or doubtful about a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity:
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes forth, apply oil-soaked cloths and linens soaked in wine, and place on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The breaking of the bone when there are no wounds or indentations, is to put plaster powder from ground mill and goat's milk on it, then place light bandages over it, and set a spindle underne cuff if needed:
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide band about the width of a palm, then put a double dressing over splints and the frame.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a slender staff three fingers wide and long, and wrap it entirely with the bandage, ensuring the head of the bandage hangs.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the staff over the fracture, turn the bandage around the neck, and remove it from the good side, and remove it from the injured side.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And wrap each part separately, and when you see the fracture is aligned properly, and it's clearly evident that the staff does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and if the ligaments heal, keep them bound.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And lay the patient on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder to elevate it.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 If it lightens the fracture of the shoulder by elevating the arm and binding it to the neck, until there is no improper dislocation occurring for twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then resume the splint if you see it's needed, and continue to strain and release it until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And it will be restored in at most twenty-eight days, or sooner for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 It often happens that the broken shoulder does not heal properly, and it remains without any strength except by touching.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 If reassembled according to the breakage pattern, and jointed as naturally as possible in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 Then apply a layer of finely ground powder with plenty of egg whites, and soak it in a double layer.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 Then place a wide and fine bandage over the shoulder, slightly wider than the scapula, ensuring that it is evenly cut at all parts of the shoulder, using flax-linen strips for padding.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 And then wrap it all with a large and firm bandage, so that the bandage does not move from its place, and inspect each suture daily.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And every time it becomes painful, re-bandage and ensure the bandage is still in place properly, and lay the patient on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 And the shoulder is reset within 20 or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when these numbers are completed, if the dislocation occurs again, beware, for it is not bone that moves easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of bone protrudes without breaking the skin, let it be cauterized as we have mentioned in treating an abscess with hot plasters.
de la brisure dou pis	And for the broken leg.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The flesh is never broken in a thousand, but this happens rarely.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 but often at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken inside, if it moves downwards, the patient feels great pain, weakness, and swelling, and possibly vomits blood, with fractures visible in the bones that are broken, and everything hurts terribly.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulder blades together with hands, and aligns the rib bones of two ribs in each hand, and skillfully puts them into all possible positions until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 then place pads and cotton over the sternum subtly with salt or another light substance, wrap it in one sheet, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 And turn the ligament into shape at the back, and restrain it momentarily, and reward each hour of freedom, and if it relaxes, then restrain it again.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 And if it needs to be loosed for corrosion or pruritis that comes on the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly and release it, cleanse the wound, and apply whatever curative methods you know.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then reset the dislocation, and restrain until it is securely in place.
de la brisure des costes	From the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Know that the fractures of the ribs come only in large numbers behind the back and within the head, and they bend solecup because they are brittle.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 And he feels much pain at the touch of the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the healing is such that you align the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then place the splint, and use a stiffening rod if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if the fracture of the ribs is descending internally, he feels great pain and swelling, similar to fever, because the bone pierces through.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 and causes pain at the ends, and nausea and vomits large amounts of blood, it is a serious illness, and in ancient times they put great care into treating it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it should be administered foods that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the fracture upward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not attempt what we cannot achieve; if there are no puss-filled abscesses present, they will not appear.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have appeared, then apply the treatment.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And some say that one puts cups on the area to draw out blood and apply heat therapy, which seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 However, there is also doubt that the cupping does not attract excesses to the area due to its weakening effect.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	; by a.stir ou the set a. ndest; they haved and# s but that t1 this if you. They are they be sume que laye- that isnt en seie est conti;
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient feels such great pain that he cannot bear it from the bone piercing through, and there is doubt for him, then one should cut above where the rib is broken, and use a tool to provide support.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then one must cut the bone, and gently draw it, and then sew the two lips of the wound if they are large, and treat with unguents until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And when an abscess occurs, place it under a cloth soaked in oil of roses and apply to the area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat according to what is necessary for an abscess until it is healed properly on the ribs or where they should be.
de la brisure dou col	Of the broken rib fracture
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Never does a fracture occur in the sternum bone, and rarely that it bends.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 And similarly to the spinal column of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, be wary if you see his hands becoming softened and swollen and lifeless, unable to move or extend them, and when pricked with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that it has fatal outcomes in some cases, and if they move and feel well when constrained and not, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient will be healed if treated properly.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And if a similar thing occurs to the spinal column of the back, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, pay attention if the legs are softened, and if there are accidents that have occurred in hand muscles, and on the back, there is windsweetness and egestion without volition.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when you have successfully reset it on its belly, there is involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is soothed on its back and it wants to rise up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Say that it can be deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 If one does not labor in his care:
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then it is a less serious matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is that you apply something hot to it if there's an abscess, place oil of rosewood or hen's egg yolk on the spine until it's soothed:
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then place one of those comforting and dry emollients on it and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest:
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bone dislocates, one must cover the head:
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat with anointing oil, until healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the head of the bone is broken, known as "head of the corner," place your poultice with your left hand and make it even with the other hand in your grasp, then position the splint and stake above, if necessary.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Then secure it (the poultice), and if there are broken bones to be set, do so accordingly, treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For breaking of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 It sometimes happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if so, there is not much room for adjustment.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 And they make a long cut, and descend into the pharynx, and come to cause pain at that spot, and swelling, and break as it grows.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And the repair is such that you stretch your hand over it until you are above the breach.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and identify what the breach is and its shape;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 and if the breach is solely on the head, then make it equal to that breach until it's naturally shaped.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it descends to the pubic bone, then place the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of this fracture can be properly set.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And once you have made it equal, place a splint on it, then put an upright stick or wood over it and secure the breach so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 and apply pressure away from the ribs until they are levelled.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed down, and follow what we have previously stated.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then proceed to restoration, and apply strapping as needed if there has been no further injury.
et c’est li maniere.	 And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	From the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The shoulder dislocation is that which is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 One method is that you take a piece of even medium-sized bone as follows:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And cut it into two pieces, and fix the ligaments at both ends, and place the patient on top of it.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then pour the poultice of bruised branches on the trunk, until it reaches the chest, and take some splints from wood, then attach under any heavy object or extendable staff.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then apply the bandage to the fracture, equally with his hands together, until the fracture heals as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one suspends the patient on his hatterail, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers so that one washes the part above the wound with their hands, and the other washes below from top to bottom, stretching each towards its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is further, restrain the ligaments from under the fracture, and on both sides of the fracture, and extend each member to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade, it must be that you place a bandage underne.chestbone and another towards him from the break, below the fracture.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 and likewise if the fracture is towards him from underne.the clavicle, it must be that you place a light bandage gently, without effort, until the fracture heals equally at the site and above the clavicle;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then properly align the fracture as it requires, and hold if an abscess does not arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if an abscess does arise, do not extract it until VII days have passed, and apply linen soaked in oil rosé (rosemary-scented oil) to the area until the abscess is calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then extract it, and the manner of extraction is to place a heated piece (emolument) on the fracture, then bring the arm up over the shoulder, and place your hand either under the armpit or above the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 and bind it with a bandage, extracting at the shoulder joint and along the arm until the limb is straight again if nothing prevents it or if there is no movement in the bone.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 If you doubt whether the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the fracture a wider and stronger splint than the others, with an interval of one inch between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to pass over the fracture by three inches from each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then strain them (the splints) firmly as I said at the beginning of this chapter on fractures, stronger and less loosely aligned.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the seat of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, at the time when you restore the broken limb, and doubt if the wound is hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then observe each of the three days that neither itching nor swelling comes to this place, or numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If done as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if such events do not occur, then the dislocation should not be reset until after three days or more, and have the patient lie on his back with hands placed above his abdomen.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 and place a linen bandage evenly on the shoulder without stretching it, and watch each hour of the day or night to ensure that the shape of the broken limb does not move or that the ligaments are softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 if advised by the power of medicine, and give it the flesh that we have previously prescribed, in such a way that the flesh is consumed first.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And when it begins to resume, so let it be firmly fixed.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary for the shoulder and limb to be restored in forty days entirely;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 Then one should detach them and administer baths and oil-based remedies to direct the healing properly.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is unpleasant and embedded, wait to reset it for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones, called "physis," one small and the other that anchors the muscle.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 and the other is large, which extends from below towards the smaller joint.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 Either it may break solely the larger bone or only the smaller one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the smaller physis is broken, the restoration and healing are relatively easy;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the great ones are broken, so is their healing poor, more severe than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it's only small bruises that occur, then slight extension is appropriate, and keeping them level.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if it's a large fissure, then it must be strongly drawn out;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 and stretch it above the suture, and raise the pocket of the hand higher than others, and the small fingers lower than other fingers, and cross them against each other at once, and the suture to be lifted higher in front of it that the patient suffers no pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 then stretch the ministers of both arms to the area opposite their hand, or at the elbow, and other ministers above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place the mirrors evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there is a break into pieces, put each piece back in its place; and if any are displaced that they prick the edge, do not attempt to restore them to their place, but instead make an incision by it as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And if with the fissure there is also an open wound that I have discussed in particular with the surgeon;
si pren la cure.	 If you take this treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And at the beginning of restoration, abscesses arise, if a plaster made of rose oil and white wax is applied, it should not be too hard or too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And apply the plaster gently over it until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 Then remove the plaster and place an empolastrone powder with plenty of egg whites, then put in the splints, ensuring that the broken one is stronger and slightly wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 and ensure it has six or more splints arranged differently:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or two. 
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 And it is strained more towards the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less in alignment, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 And be cloths that are on the fractured area soft and moist, and should not be hard or sharp.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 The bandage shall be of flax, which is strained, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And restore the limb and ligament after certain days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if any accident comes to the limb, like itching that comes to the limb, you shall wash the limb with warm water until the itch is eased.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 and let the limb not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the strapping, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones healed, and similar things, so be it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too tightened, you must soften it a bit and let it be so for some time until sensation returns, then strain again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, then do not reset until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 or inquire around it, then pinch the hands to its neck and make their sizes even, and watch for movement and turning, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And understand that this fracture is restored in 30 or 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, depending on the constitutions and combinations of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	That at the back of the hand and on the forearm occur few fractures, and there come only frequent bends many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to lie crosswise with arms extended straight.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 then he places his hand over the outstretched limb and extends the fractured bones equally, until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 and he applies a poultice and splints, if there is an abscess, it does not come forth, then he places a staff according to the amount at hand.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if the fracture is around the heart near the belly of the hand, make a cone from cloth and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 Then use a long strap or leather strip as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is in the foot, it is necessary to place a splint underneath and another one on top of the sole, so that the hands are kept open and straight; then wrap around entirely with bandages, ensuring the ties secure the joints between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if fractures come to any of us in the thighs, when they are hernias, set them straight as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 and strain with a flat object, and if you see that placing a small stake helps to lift the fracture, do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 and if the fracture is in other thighs like in the index or another, set them straight, and bind with healthy bone that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 or you tie all together tightly so they can move a little, or place under a stake as needed if there is a hernia.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And take care in the healing and positioning of abscesses, and seek out those who come with them, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh bone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see when they turn forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And its restoration is by binding it above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 The patient lies on their face, then each attendant extends their hands equally to its parts.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the fracture is close to the base of the thigh, let one ligament be near the wrist, and the other ligament above the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 And similarly if it's near to the knee, and then the ligature should be near the knee, and extend downwards.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then place the mirror to balance the bone with his two hands, as according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and tie it securely, ensuring no abscesses come forth.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there is an abscess present, leave it to heal first then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The dislocation is performed in a particular manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is necessary for you to wrap around the break with a doubled or triple bandage, and secure any excess, then turn the leg so that the ankle approaches the root of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint, and guide the head of the filament above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 then turn the leg and hip with the bandage, then place an esse on the break, and put another esse on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 then place the remaining wool between the leg and hip with soft cloth to apply equal pressure, then start binding firmly using three or four twists on the break.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 And when more you work on the breakage, and less it is held back.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 Then go to the head of the suture that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and there three stitches are above, then return below at the top of the thread until you reach near the heel.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 Hold it back if it cannot move from its place, then let it be so, and ensure that no abscess or swelling appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if this occurs, reseat whatever comes out, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 And if there are pieces of bone that protrude, it should be removed, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 If it cannot be done, then splitting the opening and draining is necessary.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And for treatment as we have said, until it is set right.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 And at no time should the thigh be broken so that stakes are inserted therein, as in the shoulder and arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 Likewise, in restoring it this way does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, more or less, depending on the different temperaments of individuals.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the groove of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 It is found that in the groove of the knee joint there are few fractures but many times it bends.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not a crack or puncture, but causes all kinds of wounds and feels like everything is well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And the restoration is such that one places equal parts as are present at its ends, so that they may be joined and moved.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then place the splint, and if needed, a round stake, and bind it as required, then repair all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, such as abscesses hot and similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply to each incident what is needed, until it is set right.
de la brisure de la jambe	s
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 That there are two bones in the leg, one called 'right' and the other called 'left'.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 And there is a fracture as it occurs in the arm, and thus is the restoration just like that of the arm equally, and the workings are all therein. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg completely around.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the smaller bone is fractured, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly.
et torne desoz.	 and straighten out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then make an extension, put it evenly, and tie the screws equally.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 but nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are more fragments, that the reduction be minor and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 And align according to your artistry.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of hardwood that encompass the leg on one side and the other, and are as long from the knee joint to just below.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 then wrap them with two layers on both above and below, and tie it securely as well, and to this bandage the leg will not bend to the right or left, thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 and none may administer the two layers along the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and he puts it onto the leg to prevent movement, and properly done in the fracture where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 and each day moves the leg, to see if there is any bleeding or other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you treat until it becomes healthy again.
de la brisure des os dou piet	On the fracture of the bone in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle there comes no breakage, but to the bone of the foot there is never any breakage and to the joints little occurs except strain in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if it occurs as a broken bone fracture, and you see the bones protruding from each other, place such poor limb on the ground as if it would walk, then now put your foot under theirs, where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then place the plaster and padding on it, and apply a small rolled bandage with two finger breadths under the abdomen of the limb, then strain to align immediately, and once you have wrapped in dressings around, and other things which you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you shall remove the ligature, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if there are any broken bones, restore them, as we have said of the hand's bones;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then break the bone with an iron rod according to the length of the arm, and make it slightly wider, then insert below the elbow the table I have mentioned, and secure tightly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 and if there are two or three, or more, break each arm with an iron rod according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and secure the table under the elbow.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 and when they are above the head of the table beneath the belly of the arm, that you do well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, just as we have described;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 and treat each accident as needed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For the fracture of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if she may sit expanded, then tilt to the part of her back, and be held behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 Then fill the wound with the patient's own hair plucked out, and place it there as large as possible.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 Then have the woman stand up, and gently lift her back little by little, so that the hair then jumps into the wound until it reaches near its opening, reattaching with the flesh.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she needs to urinate, remove the hair then, and when she has finished, reset it, doing so for seven days or thereabouts:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 If this restores the fracture, and if you see it, take a bag of beaver skin, tie thread to its opening, and pour all the contents into the wound:
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then blow air through the tube until the contents of the bag are expelled inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 The nature will return to heal the fractures.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then be filled with cotton and leave it thus for several days until it is sound.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the bone of the hand or woman's limb is broken, restore it as we have said with the thigh bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For fractures indicate various ways in the right path of restoration:
enten le donques.	 Thus understand.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and insert the penis;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 then wrap with cloth around, and leave for three days or more, and it will be sound soon.
de brisure avec plaie	Of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those who have a break with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be examined now so that the signs we have mentioned confirm them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, if there remains lead poisoning, unless you have something else, then continue to restore the break in that same hour or day if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	t he:cordon ; c;t, they can be le se leso's the mele tre la anguille as de ust; please; do not d.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and appears at the edge revealed, it must be placed carefully with your hands in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 If the extension is not properly adjusted to equalize your hands, if you reset with this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight long tines, and the width depends on the quantity of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 And therefore the healer must grasp three or four [tines], depending on what is needed for each fracture treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And it should be round and slightly larger so that it does not bend during the pressure on the limb in your workshop, and thick in front, with a greater diameter there:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "clavicle," for which the patient's head must be placed under the visible bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 and the bandage should be wrapped once so that it returns to its starting point, and they are even against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle and tendons cannot properly grasp the bone, it must be that you cut off the bone's head until the tendons have access to it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with the cup of an appropriate instrument, either cutting or drilling, within your power.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 Then remove that which is lodged in the bone due to splintering and small shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, believe that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 If you have managed to put it back in its place, then make a poultice with wine and black sticking ointment, and properly apply as needed.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 and do not place any other substance or oil on the wound unless it has oil, so as to prevent decay and putrefaction.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 then apply linen dressings when you have restored the bamen, and leave the wound uncovered, applying a covering all around it according to the quantity of the wound, ensuring that the wound is not strained with any break.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have the wise men done this to the foolish, bringing about pain or death at any given time.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Thus it is the gentle handling that differentiates these fractures from others more severely broken.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is bad or large and you suspect it may be contaminated by an accident as we have said, and there is pain at the location, then one should not apply splints.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 but wrap around it, in place of splints, with stiff cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one or two days that pus appears in the wound, take off what you have applied on it all along, and apply healing balm to the wound, like tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar substances.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is relaxed and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is proper that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the bow is bent slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if more than one day passes, and it cannot heal but remains bent, as there are small fragments of bone, so you must clean the wound with lint, and extract all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula appears at the site, or another type of decay, you should treat it as described in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as with the hip or shoulder bones, and similar large limbs, do not attempt to treat them, for often death ensues, but leave it until it heals.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 Perhaps it will attach itself again after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you know how.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And if you don't know, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises coming over the shoulder blade
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it's near the joint, and an ugly thing is to see in the affected limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 So be careful, if you are fresh (meaning young or inexperieneb).
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 if you administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and tragacanth, then whether you use any of these things individually or all together, mix them with tonic wine or abundant honey or rosewater.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And when it is placed on a wooden block, keep it firmly strained so that it does not slip for days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 Then dislocate again and repeat with another, until the joints are set straight.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 or strain it using a well-made splint;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 for the properties of the splint are such that they remove all swelling from over the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 and if the dislocation is hardened as a stone, it needs to be removed by making an incision there, and removing the excess tissue.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 or reset with any razor until it is straightened out, and cleanse as long as it remains healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which becomes weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the broken bone has been restored, but the limb becomes weak and delicate for various reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 That is why one was too tightly bound, and it was not loosened as it should have been.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 This is because there were too many bindings, preventing the member from moving freely.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 This is due to excessive bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 When too great movements are made, they do not occur at their proper time; or if from excessive moisture.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weakened.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the treatment should be that you feed the patient well, and make their body supple, until blood is multiplied within them.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and administer baths, and give them joy and ease;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 then place pitch on the limb, so that it draws much nourishment to itself, and often heals with water poultices, until nutrients reach the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 and returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After the healing of an injured limb, a member becomes twisted
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and bones are broken openly, and the form of the limb is unattractive, nonetheless it does not interfere with its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 If you do not believe those madmen who say that we must break the limb anew in its entirety, and many a fool has done so on our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 And this work is to be blamed, leading to great harm, and sometimes death occurs as a result.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Nevertheless, if the swelling and torture are fresh, it is proper to apply hot water, or cooked soft herbs such as violet leaves, roots, honeycomb, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 and the ointment with mollifying properties like an excellent diaper rash cream is to be taken, as well as musk from violets, mixed with lard or sesame oil, and applied externally.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 Or take fatty figs, and grind them with fine wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And at no time is there an inflammation of the bone by rubbing continuously and extensively with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And thus provide movement to each limb periodically.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And if the curvature is old and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be cut out with iron, then it should be coped until reaching bone, with a finely sharp incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 and place splints and carefully study the treatment plan.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This is the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, it must now be gently moved back to its place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if delayed, and the joint swells, and perhaps when resetting it causes pain at its original location;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 for then one should not move it until it has subsided.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 many times causes swelling and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 yet, when this occurs, provide the patient with warmth, then leave them to rest until the inflammation has eased.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then apply a hot water and oil mixture, then gently relocate the limb, and treat each member as care is applied to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	f Armf: TI; ça;
des mandibules	Of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes jaws become dislocated between them, and the dislocation of both occurs in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they are slightly out of their place, and somewhat loose;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 or they are entirely dislocated and hang towards the worst part, and spill the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, wrapping its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When dislocation is small, it may return to various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it is complete and severe, one must reset it promptly without hesitation;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 and in such a way that the minister douses the patient's head with a small pot of herbs, and inserts the tip into one of his hands at the root of the jaw joint dislocation within the mouth, as the dislocation is of two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And if the other two hands are also defective, to set them equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 and instructs the patient that he soften his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And places the mirror evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And if the patient returns with difficulty, especially when both jaws are together, then apply warm water and oil until they can be moved gently.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not attempt to reset it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are returned equally and the patient's mouth feels well softened, then put a padded cloth made of oil-soaked linen in cotton, and loosely bind it with soft threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 and let the patient sleep on his back with his head between two pillows so that he does not move to either side or strain at all but gently chew tender meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws are well moistened.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And then gently maneuver what it wishes, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is well aligned and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	When the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not returned to their places, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal perforation, and sometimes they may expel their contents entirely.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this, then say that it is a perforation;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times death befalls those who have it, within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the forehead or frontal bone.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The powerful ones cannot dislocate within the ribcage from its continuity to the pelvis, and it is never dislocated once properly aligned; indeed this is felt by him.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 and then press firmly with your whole palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 then place the splint and bindings on, and secure them.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 and the joint that is towards the knuckle cannot dislocate.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 if not, and if it ever does dislocate once, you must reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then place upon the plaster and bandage it, and secure it, and command the patient to rest until they are well again.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Li membieres et les os est desavisez par le movement qui avient quoi puisse ains que il ne teste puisque demorer; mais si li est grandement malsain, se doit cauteriser avec saindsont li est ; mais s’est :
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 because one way is when it dislocates from under the acromion;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 and another is to the part below the greater tubercle;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 and sometimes it dislocates above, but this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 and often dislocates from under to the scapula, especially in those with little strength, because for these it happens quickly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Those with enough hair fall easily at times and return to their place just as easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there are individuals who experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, thinking it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 It is therefore necessary that you test it, until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 And it is known when the dislocation slides towards the socket, and there is a noticeable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their variety evident.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And at the top of the shoulder blade, you will find a hollow, and from the socket to where the head of the shoulder meets the collarbone, as if it were some ears.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 And the patient cannot return their hand to its rightful place nor make any movements at all.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you can clearly see it at the collarbone.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And this method of dislocation is not to return it when new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 And the method is for the minister to lift the sick person's hand upward, then remove splints under the saddle, and gently raise the dislocation back into place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the minister lifts the hand, extends it upwards, then places a support underneath.
si venra hastanment.	 if done quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not come as we have said within days afterward, it is necessary for the sick person to be bathed in warm water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 and let them soak with something softening and soothing like an infusion of elderberry and fenugreek and honey in water, and be treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 Then instruct the patient to lie on their back, and place a band of linen equal in thickness neither too soft nor too hard, then put the footstool under the calf, lift the head from the shoulder gently, and guide the hand away from the injured side.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And apply other remedies to the top of the affected arm so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 That shoulder returns now completely, and if you see the joint according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 And that you bring a person who is taller than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 And they should be right-side up facing the patient's feet, and lift the affected shoulder from under the footstool, and raise the stool so that the injured arm hangs freely in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And other ministers support the patient with their hand under his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, do not burden them with anything heavy; then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And the dislocation is also approached in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 and it is that a long stick is inserted into the ground so that the shoulder can align like on the spit, neither too large nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 then it is lifted from under the patient, but with cloths placed beneath for support, and the patient should be lying on their long back.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 then his hand is extended away to the other side farthest, and the joint will return to its place swiftly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 If it does not wish to return due to all these things we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take a stick of six fingers in width and two hands in length, with the head bent to enter into the joint from the side as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then wrap it around with a soft cloth so that the stick does not prick the patient, then place it under the joint of the afflicted.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 And extend the arm over the length of stick, and attach the shoulder to the stick, with the hand at the top of the stick; then place the arm on the edge of an egg-slot wide enough, and let the hands hang downwards, leaving the body hanging on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The dislocation has been occurring for some time now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Et quand elle est ainsi, quelle qu'en soit la manière, si il convient de placer sous l’épaule une spere (tison) d'uneine égale ; puis appliquez la plâtrer à poudre fine sur toute l’épaule et autour, avec encens et aubun d'uef; rétablissez immédiatamenr le lien au-dessus de la plâtré et embrassez la main à son cou, les mains reposant ainsi.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it is necessary that he rests a little while, until the limb is comforted, because then it will recover sooner.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then rest more after 5 or 7 days, and move [it].
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 and if it is firmly set and not weakened, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 If the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another cause, it must be addressed with three small fire cauldrons as described in the chapter on cauldrons.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 지7일, and the joint does not stay put, nor can lift either arm upward, then say that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or weakened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 and state that the dislocation will never be placed back in its original position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that is towards the worse side, and the muscles or back, it is made by impact, lengthening of hands, and administering another remedy.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat until it is healthy again.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and later weakness in movement, many times the patient must use it until the stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	In cases of double dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 He says that the joint of the elbow has been dislocated by pulling and returns to being pulled out.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and back, and the dislocation is not properly reduced because you can see it clearly and feel it.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 and it dislocates according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sickly limb to its sound counterpart, if it appears clearly deformed.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And you must reset it as soon as the swelling appears because if the swelling appears, then repositioning would be difficult.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 and sometimes it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 for it is worse than other dislocations, causes more pain, and possibly leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And restoration is such, when it can be brought back, that you extend its hand with your two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and its arms are spread out, and the hands in such manner as is taught here, above and below, and place the joint with its pieces together or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back as he doubles his hand with his hand, and bends at the root of the palm cord that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not return to its place, provide strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and you bind with their ropes, so that it does not move during extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a wide and long cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 and when the pieces are at the joint with its hand, anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then set the joint correctly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 When it is in place, then apply a dry emollient with egg yolk, firmly strain, bend the arm at the patient's elbow, leave for some days, then release.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is secure in its place, gently release it and let go.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint is not tightly secured, repeat the emollient and binding, leaving it for several days until firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if after resetting the joint, it feels unstable and moves, then bathe it thoroughly and rub well, applying pressure until relieved.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 or you place a fat sheep wool on the joint, leave it for a day and night, then move it, and let the patient take another bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when it is ready, if you friction the joint timely, then reset it immediately, and then apply a cold bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this twice or thrice until it heals.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 And if you see, place warm wheat flour mixed with butter on it and strain it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 If it returns to its normal position.
li dislocation de la main	The displacement of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The joint of the hand dislocates easily, and its return is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly at the same time as it dislocates, so that the limb is inflated or an abscess forms warmly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the realignments are that you place the afflicted hand on a table, spread out the fingers, and align them equally, so that it places its palm over the joint's appearance and hold it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Nevertheless, you must ensure it is properly positioned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then place the patient's hand under a table with extension and flexion exercises.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's hand on a table, and let the master place his hand under that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, that is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, the strain of soothing balms and herbs may help; he allows it to rest again after a while.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to place it back in position for several days, the dislocated joint may worsen.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 then do not let anyone but the patient touch it until his hand is no longer weak and cannot grip anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 thus say that the nerves or vessels are cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If there is no other means but to restrain by fire near the wound, and sometimes it proves of no further use.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at rest, place it on the plaster we have mentioned, then stretch and leave for 5 days, then release and let be like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no weakness, then apply hot water poultice, and rub until clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the hands' joints
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 They are never dislocated either side of the hand, neither to the back of the palm nor the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 Then they are bent, and the dislocation is pushed back into place until it returns, then support the head of the hand, and bend towards the part where it was dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 And leave it for two days, then set it level on the third day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 And from that time bind it as we have said, leave it unbound for a day, then make it move, and re-bind the nuts.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this often until it is tightened, and do the same if dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it becomes healthy.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do the same when it is dislocated from another part as well.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Pain relief of the lumbar region of the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are many dislocations, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the signs are that the discharges jump out involuntarily, cannot be contained, and many times a limb is softened or either both thighs or one arm or one leg.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And often the spine moves in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 That which moves at the rear is called "gilbosis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The treatment is that you should check if the 'gilbosis' came from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 If there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, say the old methods of treatment with grand words, where there is no great benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed extracts in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the swelling that comes on the pubis, there is neither remedy nor health.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 and similarly those that arise directly in the groin, which cannot be treated except for those properly on the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 and there are times when the patient's face should be stretched for one even length, and have strain from it so that they do not fidget.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 then fix a tension in the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the limbs of the patient, and one at the calves, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the joints, among the two shafts.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 And they should be firmly closed as we have said, and the healer places his palms along the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a stick three arm lengths long, and sharpen one end, the patient lies on their side, and lift the head of the stick from under the sheet, then place the middle of the stick along the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And the healer places his feet on the other end of the stick and presses firmly until it returns to place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see this, then do the twist which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And you shall insert two spits on the head of a large arm, one toward each other, and between each spit, there should be an open hand's width of length.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And in each prick, provide a covering or bandage, and securely embed the spits in the ground so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between each pair of spits, there should be another turning prick to which the bands are attached, and in those two pricks, place small pricks one open hand's width long for turning the bandage.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then tie the band which is among the spikes at the turning point toward the head, and the other band toward the feet at the opposite turning point; each assistant turns their respective turning points throughout the entire bandage, as we have described.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 When they are level, place a dry emplaster with plenty of wax, then the bandages, and then the splint from a tablet of three fingers long, to keep the location of the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine in position, then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and instruct the patient on subtle nourishment until they are well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 If no improvement comes at the end of recovery, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, with the splint that we have mentioned earlier.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And never administer a piece of lead, and never do the appearance come in the rear spine, and believe that it is a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 And it is the bone which opens up, hence one must not have any false confidence.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 Perhaps it would bring death upon them.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Say that the hip and shoulder joints only come with dislocations, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 And the hip joint is dislocated in four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 of anterior and posterior, and front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 and more towards the inner side, while less is dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the knowledge of inner dislocation is that when joining the injured leg with the healthy one, the former is longer and opens more on the unhealthy side than on the healthy, preventing the injured from doubling its angle at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the body part near a hot abscess swollen, because the hip joint comes close to it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who come at disadvantage, so these accidents are contrary to what was mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the signs of those who have this affliction are such that their leg is well-extended as per completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 Nevertheless, do not move the knee causing pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot before, holds its urine, swells with anger, and when it walks, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those behind are that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the vein is softened, and the head of the hip to below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The reductions of this type of dislocation are that you must reset it as soon as the dislocation occurs, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 and one should not be overly confident.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways to address it: quickly return the joint, push it back in and secure it, then move it right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 In case it returns, no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must summon a strong healer, and firmly support the leg with two hands or use a bandage placed above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 And another healer extends his hand over the thigh in a way that places it below the kneecaps and then tightly wraps a light bandage around the hip.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 And yet another inserts a stick into the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And they extend both upwards and downwards at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at one time, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, it requires treatment for its resemblance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is in the hip, it must be braced with a band around the patient's unaffected side, then place a ligature at the base of the hip, and extend the ligature towards the groin, and upwards towards the abdomen.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 then use additional supports for its arms, and wrap around the affected hip joint, extending it forward fully:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 If you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then you must tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong but soft band above the two heels and over the two knees, and ensure that the affected leg is extended further than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 Then it should be hung from a log across its head, and have both arms lengthened apart on the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Then instruct another minister to cradle the patient's chest, and have other ministers hanging alongside with them who also support the abdomen firmly because the dislocation will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is on its way back, lay the patient down as we have mentioned in those with gangrene, and properly loosen the band around the affected leg and over the thigh similarly.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then apply two heating plasters, one at the head and another elsewhere on the body; then insert a stick between the buttocks near the patient's anus.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And wrap them with wet cloths around, so they do not move the patient; then extend each minister towards him, and ensure he aligns his hand to properly reset the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 But if not, place on a bed or similar, and press as we have said in hernias, and move the patient onto their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended with great haste and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 then place the minister's hand on the affected arm, and press with the other hand, extending it towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And if the dislocation is behind, do not extend the patient towards the ground or upwards, but rather it must be positioned as though his knees were unlocked at the back, as we have mentioned during supine lying on both heels.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And it lies across its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and you must gently press on the joint to the bone.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 and it will be pointed when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 then place the heels together, and put in a splint, and bind with a bandage so that the knee does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 and rests for three days or four, then unbind it, and put in a splint again;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 and if you see that they are even, strain as before, and leave for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 then unbind it, and let the patient walk easily until the limb is strong again.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The joint is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 It consists of being dislocated by pushing through internally, externally, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	 And it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not reach his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if possible, then place your back to his face, and put your feet under his.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 Then take its head in your hands, retract it between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the head shape.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 And other assistants extend his foot until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it slightly feels the leg in its thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 And apply the poultice on it, and raise the leg to the hip, keeping them together firmly for 3 or 4 days before releasing.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And do not work the patient too much until the limb is comfortably healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not quite straight, it must be strongly extended as we have said in treating knee issues, until it is well aligned.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocations
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never fully bent or unbent and within them lie the arteries.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and try to move it towards the part where it has dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The movements should be light, and when reset, gently extend with hands until fully seated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And if it is dislocated completely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and tie him up with ropes outside the leg, above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand twice, then extend upward firmly and place the foot well above.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do so twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it returns, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 If not, resume the treatment, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 And if it cannot return thus, place the patient on their back on the ground and firmly press between their thighs with a passage, and wrap them with cloths around, so they do not shake.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 Then anoint the minister's thigh and have another minister extend the foot to his hands or the line, so he ties above the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 Then extend each minister equally, and the passage be tightly between the patient's thighs to hold when stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then position the splints to stabilize the dislocation with your hands, and use other methods to support the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it reaches a point, apply the bandage and compresses above, make sure to tighten them properly, wrap the cloth around the leg, and protect the nerves behind the ankle so that the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 then leave it for two or three days, and if possible loosen the bindings, adjust the straps.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 then remove on the fourth day or after that, encourage the patient to move around freely for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 and if it progresses before this term is up, do not be concerned that it may still dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
des dois	:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be extended without much effort, which is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 If the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it must be made to sit on a flat level or right-angled table, and place your foot under which of these joints are separated, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when it is level and nothing is apart, place under the sole of your foot a two-legged table, then strain firmly, and let it be for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And make it rest until it is sound.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When wound comes with the dislocation and we see its restoration, many times it happens that patients die:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compasserate and slow to act, do not be hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 At the beginning of healing, apply to an abscess until it is drained, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess may properly heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is back in place, apply soothing remedies to the abscess and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And if there is also a bone break and small pieces to be removed, follow what we have said in simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And be wary of falling into despair, as I have said, for it will affect your health according to your Maker, and for the safety of your weapon and body.
