O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science assembly, along with its explanations and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I shall complete this treatise with this section, which is part of the work on hands, known as "Surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and performed throughout everything, its knowledge is lost and scattered, leaving only minor descriptions found in books by ancient authors who have written about it.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises mistakes and falsehoods, closing off understanding and dispelling knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I shall revive the essence of this treatise according to its arrangement of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other remedies from practice with the support of explanation and preparation as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters in our time are found, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those who undertake this matter to study the science of anatomy, as Galien says, understanding the judgment of limbs, and their forms, connections, separations, and knowing about bones, nerves, flesh, and the number of veins, along with the movement and flowing vessels and resting ones, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates said that without the knife there is little, and with the hand is much; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with what has been said before, beware lest they fall into error and kill people; thus I have wanted to warn many times against those who undertake this science and abandon reason for experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	In this case I saw a madman who cut an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and he severed the veins in her neck; for so much blood issued that the woman died on her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another fool who treated a stone in an eye of a man, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder, and within three days, the man died inside.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to treat it, and saw the condition of the foolish man and the size of the stone, and indeed if he were cut by it, he would die therefrom.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	This other wise woman took care of the duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was also a wound; the uninformed healer held the fracture near the wound at the extremity forcefully without letting any blood flow, leaving it like that for some time until the leg became completely healed and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come to him, and hurried to undo his leg; and when it dislocated so easily without pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the contamination was already firmly established in the member and could not be healed; it did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see one other mirror which caused a hardened abscess to swell up, then inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because an ulcer, when it is free of black bile humor, should not be touched with iron unless it can be loosened from the part so that all corruption may be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger in various arrangements; and I will show in each section of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 It is necessary that you guard against it, so the insane cannot speak ill of you; if you take up your arms in consideration, and commence treating the sick lightly yet firmly, using the best way possible through God's grace to come to health and be praised; leaving behind diseases with serious healing. Remove your weapons from what causes doubt, so that in yourself you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Do not take care of diseases badly, lest you be called foolish healers by others.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire and medical caustics, and it covers treatments from the head to the feet; including types of piles, methods for applying cautery, and all necessary aspects in its practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about tailors and surgeons, plasters, wounds, arrow extraction, and similar matters; it is also ordered with instructions on piles treatments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	s
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we recall our work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of assistance and harm from each composition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of assistance and harm is like lengthy words and subtle science and hidden remedies; and on this subject, many wise ones have spoken and agreed with it; but their words are few, for I shall recount at great length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps all constitutions or matters where there is material; for two types of constitutions exist: those with hot matter and those with dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion combined with matter, some believed that fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others said the opposite: that fire cautery does not benefit diseases originating from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with warm diseases from heat or dryness, as it exacerbates them; those who say otherwise claim that fire cautery greatly helps diseases caused by heat and dryness in people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you consider the body of man and his humidity with respect to the hot complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I heed this advice.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And so, do not interfere unless you have tried it and know well the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human temperaments, and their conditions and causes of diseases, and occurrences and duration of time; we are not afraid for other temperaments, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the healers gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that the combination of fire and cautery is a secret of healing arts, and offers greater mercy than caustic medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	And as the membor quidemement of art cauctere de medicine. So tu fire and to let medicine de fence the arse.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Medicines that burn come from one limb to another through alignment, and bring severe diseases of healing to the affected member; and sometimes it kills the patient due to its potency and the goodness of its substance does not do this unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experiment and long service in the field, as well as study that I have put into the art; and therefore I excuse myself for my lengthy words, because it pleases me not to take from you the secret which is kept or given forth by fire, nor the quality of work, how it supports diseases of organs, as the philosopher says in demonstration; thus receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when cuts should be made with a fire brand, and the patient praying.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	: laismen, the, whichnus:me: that they, and thise. And so s.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think even once, dear child, as the foolish physician does; for the disease healed by cautery has no return; and it is said thus; but it is not so, as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes complexion or dries humors causing pain, and it works more quickly than other medicines due to its efficacy and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the things that disease comes at any time according to the patient's condition and location of the illness and its strength are gathered in him through the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administerebt there where it has little superfluity and moisture, as with densifying cauteries for pain and other matters, but pain does not return often.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine; and it is true; but they falsely believe that cauteres are worth after medicine, when in fact cauteres are the last of medicine because we administer treatment methods for any disease which may be effective, then we administer cautere, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then properly applied cautery is among the last of medicines, not according to the whims of foolish miracle-seekers.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a surgical instrument made of gold is more effective than one made of iron, and they claimed this was due to the quality of the gold and its high substance; and they said that the heat from cautery does not cause putrefaction but it is indeed so, as I have tested it, and found that in some men it is true. Cauteries of gold are worth more than iron ones, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And even when you heat an instrument made of gold, it is not because of the color of the gold that it heats up quickly and then cools off; and if it is overheated, too much so it burns; and thus there are enough obstructions.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use fire cautery as we have skillfully prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I order this chapter from the head to the feet so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil caustery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	le t,
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by solvent medicine, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and temperament and habits of the sick person can endure; then return the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make the patient sit with a cross between your hands and place his hands under their knees; after putting the base of your palm on the base of their two elbows between them; and when they come to your arms, if it bleeds there from then apply the cautery called "olivare," which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the writing on the leg, and draw and strain your hand gently as you turn it slightly; then lift your hand very slowly, and return to where you see a small bone; if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you can see the bone as I have told you; after that take a little salt, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the wound, leaving it there for three days; then place clean linen over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon," until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	When ancient ones say that as long as an open wound persists, it cleanses more; therefore let it move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not irritate the fire cautery too much if a part of the bone is burned; and then treat those areas where bone has been burnt.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should not irritate the fire cautery too much, and if it's wide enough like the pins women put in their shoes for humors to flow out, then keep open wounds exposed for long; afterward, cleanse and bandage them properly.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of fire cautery do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, except for some men who have cause for fear; and it seems to me that I should abandon them; because the neck is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify with other limbs; likewise when the neck of the sickly is naturally weak, and the first appearance of fire cautery appears more healing and moving for me, so I work accordingly in this regard.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	And the persistent pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the head is chronic pain and lasts long, one should use years and pills called "cochie," along with the purge of the head and oils and poultices; if the fire cautery as we have previously mentioned is done, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	If the patient's head is of a strong constitution and not too cold, then you should cauterize under that fire cautery as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization to the edges of the head up to the bone as we have previously mentioned, and making a fire cautery called "vessels"; there are spots where one applies poultices; hold your hand so you do not see all the way to the bone: patients feel much more pain in this cauterization than others, which I will speak of elsewhere; it is necessary that the fire cauterizations at the edges be finer than those used on the middle part of the head, and here's how they should look.
dou cautere dou chief	of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in the head and the disease extends to the ear, and the shoulder is purged by cleansing medicines, along with other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases, but none help: then you make cauteries according to two ways, that is, with cold medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with cold medicine involves picking a piece of hair about two inches long and removing the skin and covering it with two small slices; then place it over the temple where the pain persists, so you can replace the hair shaft from underneath the leather; when placed correctly and strapped tightly, leave it like this for twelve hours; then remove it and bandage the area again, leaving the wound as such for two or three days; then apply a cloth soaked in melted butter until no more pus is present.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is safe; and if you see any of the burning remedies I have written about, or as described in treating with burning remedangs.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery of this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole with a small protrusion and a tiny opening; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and slightly twist the iron gently until half of the point you desired has been scorched; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn further, allowing copious bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton wool on the wound and applying it to the area for three days; then you put oily cotton in butter, and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a fire-cautery called 'cultelare', place it at the very tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	From migraines
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery is made of medicine and iron without any effect, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellara" until it becomes white; and so place it on a tender spot for half an inch long, remove your hand once, and ensure that you do not cover the artery and let the blood flow up to the bone; and be wary of the jaw moving when bitten, and the nerves having only focus on movement without pain or spasms occurring in a bad way, and prevent any bleeding from an artery once it has been capped, or if there is great fear associated with capping or for those who are unfamiliar and untested; but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is capped, and I will show where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not relieve the illness and the patient is suffering greatly, cauterize at the head as we have said before, and care for the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we mentioned earlier or abscess extraction with a cautery that has two blades; and this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ears from exposure to cold weather
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from the ears comes due to cold exposure, and medicinal solutions have been applied along with other treatments we have mentioned in that section of the book, and if the pains do not subside, then use this cautery called "poins," which is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After placing the cautery all around the afflicted ear, where pain resides on both sides and recedes slightly from the base of the ear after you have reached with it; then apply ten pricks (poins) between each ear. Then cleanse the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	t a, that estrend le pe ciel byt:
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that must be treated with cautery is only those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make cautery on resemblances that come from bruises and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this resemblance of torture that moves from idles and purifications of the head and gargling, which is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little further towards the temple, and the third near the joining of the two lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, making the first cautery on the head of the ear just below a bit from the tip of the horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as one pace; leave the cautery until half the skin has been burned away; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the resemblance of the cut is as we have described before but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after curing them in place as I have previously stated, until they are healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and one at its peak, and one where they are called "vassels," as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery by the mouth of the stomach; apply them as we have said before.
de litargie	Lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient large years and purgative pills to cleanse the brain; afterwards lift up the head of the sick person entirely, and place on their occiput the embolism of sinapisperm which is written or mentioned in the treatise about plasters; this is how you do the cautery: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus, well done; and if not, make three cauteries in the area above the forehead down to the neck, with two inches of space between each cautery; treat as you would other wounds, and if they are close together, make another in the middle; and if necessary, place two others on either side of the horns, and treat until healed; this is known as an "olivary" cautery, as previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	For coldness in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to warm the head as previously mentioned; after warming the patient'ebody, make a cauterization in the area of the forehead and on each horn, then one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly from pain, and the illness is severe, create four cauterizations along the spine of the back; leave it until the skin turns completely red, then remove your hand. Afterwards, treat until healed, this being an "olivary" cautery as previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use iron caustic unless they are phlegmatic, and first must purify the brain with leeches and other treatments that we have described in the section when patients are large and suffer greatly from medical pain.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure, he shall gargle and chew to purify the brain often with good meats; then wash his head thoroughly, and make .i. caustic as we have said before, and .i. caustics on each horn; and if the patient is very ill and suffering, then apply caustics as I have told him who has paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine along the back and neck, and make it olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make him this subtle cautery according to the following manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted effluents and thick phlegm, then you cauterize the body parts as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them a drink such that the brain be cleansed, according to what it is in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	C's
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see that cauterization is needed, do so by making many points across the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly; and then apply cotton wool soaked in butter and lard from a pig.
de l’awe des eulz	From the edge of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the edge comes first as per the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protects from all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing to return his head, and making a fire cautery in the forehead, and making two small cauterizations on top of each temple where the nerves originate from both eyes together or from one eye; and bandage all veins and arteries that are under the crown so that the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood leakage, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the burning as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making the incision how to cauterize it; and never make a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	about the body's tears (meaning: tear ducts)
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and it is seen to be from superfluous cold phlegmatic humors, then you do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work descending on them: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries over the temples, and two cauterizations under the eyes; and if there is a need for more, apply careful cauterization above the eyebrows with small cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of wine; afterward make a fire cautery on the head, and apply an oil cauterization; and two cauteries with "clavelis" (a type of cauterizing instrument) above the eyebrows, one slightly below the hairline; and be careful not to damage the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cautery called "clavelis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then you use this cautery called "Olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is why this form occurs:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries on the two sores as long as they are like eyelashes; do not let go of the hand except until a third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	should beaux: Ouze pnaz by that t ; it'chin.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn to scales, and prick at their owner's eyes, prompting cauterization in two ways: by fire or with burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even; if it pricks at its base, one must hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are fully grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Once the hairs have grown long and evenly, then place the patient in a comfortable position; above their eyebrows draw a figure that resembles a moustache, and begin with the sign near the hairline. Then apply cotton soaked in honeyed egg white and musk oil to the eye, using this form of cauterization:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the wound you have marked with small and frequent applications, ensure the skin is properly healed in that spot; and signs of the health of the work are visible when the paper recedes, and the hairs rise to the length of oil; then gently wash your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burned area is healed; after applying ointment, continue until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come in and the paper is softened as before; then resume the cautery at that same spot just like you did initially; and if the hair falls out, continue cauterizing until the paper rises to its natural place, and it's even, without touching the bare skin.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery cauterization of medicines is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of bay leaves; then take French soap and lively salt, each one ounce, and grind them well together quickly, so it doesn't cool down, then sprinkle on the form that you made like bay leaves, and put over the paper; and if the illness is only in one place, work with a pinch, and as such, and put cotton wool soaked in oil beneath. And the head of the patient be in your hands clean and press it into the medicine, and squeeze every time the patient feels irritation from the medicine, for he also burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, apply the medicine to your wound properly.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the morsication is healed, raise the limb and return it if you see that the paper (bandage) has been raised just as if it had been done by heat or cutting; and if so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, reapply the medicine to the limb or if it has not worked, until your actions are equal and the eyes are aligned; then apply a cotton cloth in oil until the heat is gone, then cure the limb with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, as long as it becomes healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And you must carefully guard your work so that the medicine does not affect the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, resume treatment on that spot where it was softened by the parchment properly, as you did before; after curing until it is healed; and this is the method of the bellows with great care.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, be mindful of the limitations; and do not place the correct path before one who is devoted to this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For treating a fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not help, then it is necessary to perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	(prstroliud the ous and by pas qu: a mallemente de la bon les il oise prouss<byce tele s
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the abscess and drainage; and if closed, work on it, and push through the bend; then put hot caustic on it properly, and hold your hand to the caustic at the part without hair above the wound, so that your hands do not go mad; and place the caustic in the oil's fatty substance, and let it decay.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you begin the cautery up to the bone, that would be best.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, resume the cautery one more time if needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards apply moistened cotton with butter, and treat with dry ointment until healed, and after forty days when it is healed, apply corrosive medication until the bone recovers; then follow according to what occurs in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for fistulas, which none of the ancient ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Begin with the fistula and find its opening; after that, insert a thin needle of which this shape is found.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it the quantity of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand firmly or something similar, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted into its place; and then one must put cotton soaked in this on the affected area: the lead will fill it as needed from fistula, and heals with a remarkable speed.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, one should administer vinegar to the wound, and return the fistula to its proper location in accordance with where it rightfully belongs.
des crevaices en levres	of ruptures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur cracks on lips called "hairs," especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small ring-shaped fire cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply haste treatment into those cracks until they are healed; after that, remove the wax layer until it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the incision of the abscess on the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the neck or in the eyelid, palate, or tooth roots, after decaying and rotting and becoming old and turning into a fistula; you treat it as we have described in divisions, but it does not benefit: then you must apply a cautery according to the quantity of the faster; after removing or opening the fistula, hold your hand until the heat comes out from it, and then release; perform this once or twice, after the treatment as we have described above, until it is healed; if treated thusly, it's good; but if not, you must expose the cavity and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your treatise.
dou movement des dens	Movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines when nothing else works, then place the head of the patient in a sling; afterwards dry the cautery so that the form will come after again in part as you put a wick on the tooth; and insert hot cautery into it quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the warmth reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and resume the cautery at your discretion; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water and leave it for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moved is secured again; the softened gums are held still, and the moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	To alleviate the pain of the tooth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold or heat, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cautery by two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is made by extracting butter from a calf, and shaping the end into a spoon of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and form a ball of butter cloth, and apply it hastily to the painful tooth. Perform this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth; if you see hair and cotton coated in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth and hold with a heated iron until the heat reaches the joint of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The fire cautery should be such that you select a vessel of iron or brass, and it is large enough so the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; after warming the cautery, wait for its shape to appear as described, then place it on the wound and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be lessened that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then rub fiercely; and that is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform a fire cautery on the head of hair you wish to choose, and according to your ability; this is the shape of the wax.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the scrofula is of cold humors and does not respond to medicines, then heat the fire caustic from which afterward comes its form, and it has two openings for fumes to escape in the other part; and apply hot caustic to the abscess once or as needed until it reaches the edge of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply caustic according to its quantity, leaving it so for three days; and apply cotton wool soaked in butter as long as there is scarring. Then treat with oil compresses and bandages until healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the wound:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When phlegm prevails in the throat's ducts, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be purged first with solvent medicines; afterward, apply cautery at the root of the throat, and ensure not to reach up to the throat itself, but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, perform another cautery at the joint of the neck and the head of the spine; and apply the cauterization known as "clavile" from which we have previously described its form; heal it as we have previously mentioned until it is sound.
de la toust	Regarding the chest cold
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	Regarding the chest cold, when it is caused by cold moisture and the patient has no fever or sweating, and the illness is early, perform two cauteries on the loins in front of the thighs; and another cautery between the buttocks; and let there be the cautery called "clavile" according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see this, perform cautery by pinching all the cauterization called "points" from which the form is as described in the ear disease mentioned beforehand; and let the points extend up to XXX or around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treatment of the dislocation as described above, apply the cautery three times according to this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these points are lighter, you make them at intervals of three parts.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	For the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the evil spirits have been expelled from their backs and sides; then remove the kernel which is within the inflamed area of your left hand's thumb joint; and if the joint has dislocated, heat with a cautery that has two pointed tips as in its shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and heat the kernel until it reaches up to the ribs, with four figures of the cautery together; and since it is made with a cautery that has three points, for which the figures of cauterization are these three cauteries; and they resemble the nerves according to their subtlety like a tent, and it's the shape of the cautery that has three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it placed near this nerve, because of which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery to soften with soap; afterward let the patient rest and do not move their limb for a long time until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated again, something unusual happens rarely; then make a caustic poultice on the thick part of the cauliflower joint, or many small caustics are applied.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For once repositioned, it is bone that is affected; and there remains dampness and the patient feels better.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When cold and excessive moisture affect the stomach to such an extent that it is strained from its nature, and there are many bubbles in him which he cannot manage, and using usual treatment methods does not help; then it should be made supine on his back, stretching out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After this, make three cauldrons from the edge of the penis for the quantity of a spoonful at each incision point, and all along the clavicle, and two cauldrons behind the two ribs so that the figure of the cauldrons is at three angles, with equal space between them so they do not touch when rotated; and the cauldrons should be made such that they hang on both sides of the neck, and their shape follows this form without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see the need for a large cauldrone in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and if one has fear of such caudron, pinch and hold it atop the stomach I point as determined by the quantity seen; then proceed with the cauldron called "points" entirely.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound as we have had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and bloating, until it is restored to its natural state due to excesses; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit them, so it is necessary for the sick person to lie on their stomach; and signs of three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, near the hypochondria where the ribs of the body come; and there should be a space between each cautery equal to one inch; and the cautery should be long and slender, not pressing too hard with the entire hand; and it is burned only enough on half its width, and the patient lies straight with their feet raised; if they cannot do so, then let them lie down, extend their legs, and raise their arms.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 If you wish to do so, if you cauterize the cuticle cauldrous, provided that you are skilled and wise in the art, and ensure not to burn the entire area, for it would dry out the whole body; and let it not come as far as a blister, because the skin is very delicate there, and it stings when touched.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 If there is an abscess on the liver, and you see if it is in the cartilage or in the skin: if it's in the cartilge, then the patient feels pain but not too severe; and if it's in the skin, then they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment is due for the patient, it requires that they lie flat on their back; then mark over their head or where the abscess is located, and then heat the caustic which resembles a grain of barley.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And for the fire cautery, continue until the root is scorched, and comes up to the blistering, until all inflammation subsides; after the treatment according to the healing of ulcers as long as it is healthy; and with this used fire cautery, none should inflict harm except those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have spread at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he may hardly work, and yet it seems to me that letting them move is beneficial.
dou cautere de pleuresin	by; If you see sul monstral Prussons:s.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	They say that one should make root cauteries of Aristotle's herbs in this manner: take the largest possible root of Aristotle'e's herb, dry it and prepare it as long and thick as your fingers; coat with oil and hold over fire to cauterize. One large cautery between the earlobe and neck, two small ones slightly descending on the area below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, tilting backward slightly; one at the center of the thighs, another above the stomach, one between the inner sides of each shoulder, and two along both sides of the lower chest; do not press your hand too tightly but open it widely as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancient ones say that no man should use the fire cautery as if scraping hair, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then great pain ensues, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this kind of work there is fear or the patient dies now, as a fistula arises which cannot be healed.
de la mice	They say that no one should use cautery without resemblance to razors; heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; but in this case of treatment, pain follows as we have said with li abscesses. However, fear or illness may cause death at once, mice that occurs fistula cannot be healed.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mouse bites as previously mentioned in sections and it proves effective, then there are three ways to use fire cautery which are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There is a way to do this where you make three or four cauterizations, aligning according to the length of the wound, following the figure of the liver cautery we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the cauteries at once, so that the patient lies on their back; another way of cauterization is where you heat the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in dislocating the shoulder; remove the flesh which is towards the wound, or from the edges of the injured side leaning to the left, and make elevations that you raise the flesh according to its size, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be proportionate to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, then apply the caustic, and thus it will have four. If you see this, cauterize with all of the caustic at three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After curing when it has acquired pus for long periods, and this is achieved by moving as the previous mentioned methods indicate.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Caustic does not apply to hemorrhoids; rather it's in the manner called "escharotomy.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary for you to make four caustics around the belly, one above the stomcu, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one on the area of the genitals; and let each cautery be close to the place where the core is.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the wound open to heal and allow for pus drainage for long periods, do not neglect caring for the patient after cauterization; healing will be hastened, and both intentions are with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen is to be a small nail as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what it was previously presented.
de l’enfleure des piez	Regarding the swelling of the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the fingers are swollen in a person who is epileptic, and filled with yellowish wax, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the hand between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the caustic moving backwards.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, thus it will cut off the yellowish wax, and be according to this method of cauterization.
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shin bone; make the cauterization long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cauterizations lengthwise to let out the bile; afterward treat the other methods that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	For dizziness
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines flow out, they cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before or cauterization of the stomach, where the cautery circulates around it; four subtle cauteries surrounding the belly, all converging to one clavicular cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the remedy is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of corns (likely a typographical error in original text meaning 'hemorrhoids' as "emorroide" would mean hemorrhoid).
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the bunions are numerous or several, ancient and composed of large cold and moist corrupted humors, treated as we have said in divisions, and it is not effective, then perform causticization: III on the spine of the back, that which is all forward from below the arm pit in a triangular manner, and I caustic under both buttocks; and if you think his stomach has cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then perform a large caustic on the abdamen as previously described, another on the liver, and another on the chest with all caustics of iron bar; leave the caustic uncovered for long periods.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the limb until it is whole again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshiness called "thelulus"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you bandage the ulcer, first cool the cautery which appears like a shaving tool, and then set it all ablaze on that bandaged area; and let your hand and the cauterizing stick reach as far as the vein's source, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large cautery on an inflamed area, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the ill cannot endure bandages or dressings, we will tell of it in its place; if a disease comes that cannot be healed but by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is an occurrence of fistula, and it becomes infected with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, you must try to fully expose the entire area, and be aware of all parts of the tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After cooling the fire cautery that seems raw and rash, insert it into the fistula according to the amount of area entered, and restart the cauterization until the affected body parts are healed, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of flesh needed; beware of burning any nerves present, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, beware of these veins, and do not make any cuts that are hardened by scar tissue, and remember they are not always present; after curing the limb until it is whole again, if the veins are sapped, and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the vein is entirely healed; and if the materials have not been removed, know that the vein is swollen and corrupted in the bone; and thus as one of these we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	For the tounz, li de la ou cest desai de plues d’ours tu l’ad ecrit. Le cordon neant les choses; orent sus le vienes prandans ses mains ester auet en lieu du ire sans lais quid f ados et s que il, et nos rons ouiement et li raient sus crainbaisse l’a.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, and the patient holds urine, then you make a fire cautery on the part below the bladaderiverance of blood when opening a vein", "and incising an abscess", "and in the treatment of wounds", "and in the extraction of arrows", "and cutting into stones", and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
de la marris	Of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicle is cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation; and when they come, it causes great pain: then one must perform three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said about bladder cauterization, and two on the back; and let the clitoris be cauterized, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the bag of the thigh, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the lumps have departed with their veins, so one must cauterize the patient on the bag of the thigh with a cauterization similar to a circle, and straight ahead of the leg around the bag as it turns, so that the bag be within the circle; and let the cauters be such as those which were used in cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si ces cautérisations ne sont pas présentes, alors faites trois gros cautérisations sur l'olivaire (oubit), et que la cautérisation soit aussi large comme toutes les autres; et continuez le traitement jusqu'à ce qu'il soit sain.
de la dolor de la hainche	From the pain in the hip.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient shows signs of what we have described earlier, and treatment does not help, and the illness has been long-standing: then you must purge the sick person of large humors with foul pills or other good pills that appear similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing the cautery; and the manner of doing so is according to two methods: that is to say, combined with burning remedies, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cautery has many methods, among which one is such that you cauderize three triangular cauders according to this shape on the thigh's pouch; it should have good depth and be large, with space between each cauder the size of a thumb, and they should be olive-shaped; never done in the middle of the head of the thigh, for there are four as per this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see the triangular cautery that we have mentioned before for shoulder joint dislocation; but make it in such a way that the circle contains the entire gusset and all sides are burned away.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And it is the method that is done in sciatica when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it comes down to the thigh and leg, make the caustics where the patient says the pain is held, with four caustics above the ankle on the left side; and be there the encaulding caustic, and burn the thickness as hard as possible; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two or three toes near the foot, cauterize where they feel the pain with three or four points at a caustic called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the work is necessary and if there is more; and if it has been that pain is below the groin towards the thigh, make cautery with a cutellary or circular caustic, and give good care in all your cauteries so you do not harm either the nerves or large arteries, and do not cause further harm or constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen some who made caustics above the ankle near the foot, and they continued until the leg was completely atrophied, with the feet likewise affected, all of which were pierced and corrupted entirely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a treatment of the abdomen which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise men say in the hip fire treatment as follows, make it of iron and have its head as large as a small newt or somewhat smaller, with spaces between them equal to a peacock's knot; and let there be two parts on top, like nails, and also evenly spaced, and the iron rod should be well forged in shape.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heat it until all is red and pus flows out, then place it on the chamois leather of the bad hip, and turn it over along the ribs; cauterize once with a hot iron and leave for three days; afterwards apply beef suet ointment, and let the open wound remain uncovered for a long time; after applying salve, do so until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cauterization because of its appearance, and few do it; however, these are good cauterizations, if the patient can tolerate them, and where they find relief.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The fire medical instrument is made of segments inserted into one another in which the margin of the door descends, and it's either flax or iron long enough to wrap around; at the top, there are two holes, with between each a space as wide as a thumbprint; they overlap above and below and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the sack on the patient's hip lying on their side near the ribcage, and quickly place your hand mostly over the sack of the hip; after pouring between the II circles of hot wax that is heated by fire for an hour, and let the patient feel the heat and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it will cause mild burning like from fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip wax, leave for three days, and apply oil until what is blackened by the bruise turns white; then let it rest for three days as after the treatment of ointments until healing.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, fashion the instrument in a way that you did for the hip evenly; and it is the manner of hot awing, which I have written about in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take equal amounts of alkaline and quicklime, crush them together, and place in a new flask.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 Where there is a small opening for the point of a razor to enter, place it into another well-plowed flask, and above that put quicklime and alkali, with gentle heat until you have two handfuls of powders as thoroughly mixed by your hands; let it rest in this way until the ague ceases and becomes clear or plumped, then take all that moisture and pour into chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 When it is very cold and properly managed with methods of medicine and cauteries on other limbs because it performs one work as before, and if applied to other medicines where the heel is well cauterized like in tarsal surgery and honeyed cardoon and gallnuts with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galien tells of a case where a gentleman was healed from the pain in the heel and sciatic nerve, which greatly troubled him, and said that no other treatment was given, and it became healthy at least once when this cure was done, and he then bathed as follows.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in this manner that you shall take the litargire green and dry, grind it quite fine with a little fat, and put it on the heel, thigh, and leg where the pain holds, and wrap; and let him lie for three hours or until the patient no longer feels thirst.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make it enter a warm bath until the body is slightly rejuvenated, and you also have them lie down, and the pain will go away completely and they will be well again.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use fire cautery with such remed#ies, unless after the evacuation of humors.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat's thorns, it greatly helps; and the cauterization should be done in a particular manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take the linen and moisten it with old oil, and place it in the hollow that is between the thumbs and pinkies on either hand.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dry goat's thorns, hold them over fire until they turn to charcoal, then place them on the linen and let it be ashes; do this again, continuing thusly until you feel by touch that it reaches the knee, and the pain ceases. And these methods of cautery are called "cautery of goat's thorn.
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain in one's back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive bleeding, or from seemingly expanded cold matter, none of these warrant fire-cauterization unless it stems from an infusion of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has vomited foul pills or other substances, place them on their back where the pain is located and make three lines marked with incisions, and for each line 5 cauterizations or more according to the vitality and amount that the patient can tolerate; perform the cauterization as done by "points" caustic. If so, do 3 or 4 at the midline according to this method:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this disease comes to young children, and the signs at its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when standing up, and fear; you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and an appearance that appears above the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and have examined it, then cauterize with a caustic lancet as follows in this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the fire cautery is used, it straightens each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, if using a pointed cautery around the spine with two or three lines close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the leg until it is straightened according to what we have said, and be careful not to place a cautery in an area with nervous tissue.
de la dolor des jointes	For pain from the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moistures spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes to the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and if it is due to cold causes and medicines cannot heal it, then they are treated with cauldrons in this manner: make numerous cauldrons around the joint of the foot, and let the cauldrons be olivary according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is a need to hold above the face of the foot, then do not use any caustic at all.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains reach to joints and other joint areas, which happens often, then use one caustic on each knee three or four of each part; and for all olive oil, but if more is needed, apply more, but do not hold your hand too close that the skin's color changes.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 If the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the caustic as we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make small points around each finger; and if there is no pain in the fingers, apply caustic to each joint and hair of the hand; and if the pains reach the sides or shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care for the patient, and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, it will be healthy with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	On the treatment of wounds on the skin
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When disorder arises and the bowels descend as limbs and it is newly so, when you see such need to cleanse them, do not pass any day without doing so; use things that relieve the belly so that the fetus descends from the womb. Afterward sit down on your back with hands placed between thine arms. Command him to rub his knee until the bowels are repaired and the limbs reset, then grip tightly above the disorder at the bone of the wrist, and sign as if a semicircle over the body; afterwards apply the cautery in this manner:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 as long as he is pure and his senses are clear.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then reset the joints to their place; and cover him with a cloth so they do not turn backward; and work well on his thighs for the patient, placing cushions and sergeants under the thigh cuffs, as well as another over his calf where it covers his hands; then apply caustic all along your hand, straight up to the bone, lengthwise, until you reach the b groin; if not reached on first try, continue again until reaching the bone. Be subtle that the joint does not swell when applying caustic; do not burn it; and by this care, prevent the patient from dying or any other illnesses.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your treatments are of no use.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and also large for grown men in proportion; after three days heal with a butter fire until the burn is well oiled; afterwards use other salves until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back forty days so that the wound becomes strongly joined; and ensure that the northing be long enough such that the boil does not protrude when he desires to rise from bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, bandage him well, and keep it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive drinking and eating, and shouting too loudly; and once he has learned this lesson, he is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter about the treatment of tailors in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	On treating wounds of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When diseases come in other bellies and are recognizable, and you see that they no longer grow, one must perform the caustic treatment with the caustic as per its quantity, ensuring that two-thirds remain; then proceed to healing according to what we have said; none of the old texts mention that it should be treated with a caustic at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first sign the edge of the wound and draw a line for its width above the disease, another one below, and hold your hand in the middle of all the caustic slices.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 However, the initial caustics are lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then one must be treated with cautery known as "points," and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its size and weakness, its virtue, and its location of contortions and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is near the first cautery, that's good; if not there, resume with another cauterization on top of it, as it is customary for the member to heal from close proximity, so you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is well.
de meselerie	In the context of medieval medical treatises and practices, "de meselerer" refers to a field of medicine known for its specialization in surgery. Mesellers were practitioners who performed surgeries such as trepanation (drilling holes into the skull), amputations, and other invasive procedures aimed at addressing physical injuries or illnesses that required direct intervention beyond what medicinal treatments could achieve.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 Measles have been alleviated at times by cauterization with great help, especially diseases that come from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you observe the wound being treated, take care if the disease is at its onset, and if it has been addressed as we have discussed in that division of dislocations, neither protruding nor receding, and you are uncertain whether corruption might afflict the entire ailment, then you shall perform four cauterizations: two above the nape, one towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and another on either side of the ears, as well as behind near the neck; allowing your hand to guide the cautery until it reaches bone, ensuring that flakes are produced so vapors from thick humors can escape.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the melancholy is scattered everywhere and it manifestly appears, then one must use the caustics of these cauteries as we have mentioned earlier; and a small caustic where necessary, and two on the spine at the neck, and five along the spine of the back, and one large one above the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the shin tendons, and one over each joint of hands and feet, and over the palms' hollows; and beware of nerves that are behind pressing downward to not burn them; and never do a caustic above the bone of the wrist, or one on the bone of the stomach, or one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more caustics you perform, the greater the relief it provides; and understand that the patient does not feel pain from the caustic as healthy ones do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it matters that the caustics be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in handling iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healthy again.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then you make caustics on the limb according to its size; and let the caustic be slightly translucent at the edge; then cure with ointments until it is healthy again.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 At no time is cauterization done on the hand, foot or back when a nerve causes limb paralysis, and thus osteomyelitis occurs; and in any case, it does not involve anyone unless they are familiar with the limbs and the functioning of the nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	Albares refers to medical treatments or remedcuous.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as 'albaras' is old and medical methods are of no use, then cauterize with a small caustic application according to the quantity of grain in the wood until it becomes pale, and its color changes; then treat with flour, lentils, oil mixed with rosewood shaveby and plantain leaves, as well as colon blood and heron's blood, one part each. Mix everything together, bind it with a cloth, and keep it warm until it becomes healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When an ulcer begins to appear and you see it early on, caustic treatment is done using a caustic circle around the entire circumference of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 However, the sages say that caustic treatment is also done in the middle of the ulcer; however, I do not think this is good because it may lead to further ulcers and corruption, and I have never seen this approach taken before; moreover, a more appropriate action is to perform caustic treatment around, using the "circular" caustic method as we have discussed in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	For the swelling that cannot be relieved
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When anyone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it delays dying due to excessive discharge or because of the patient's frailty when they are decrepit (that is, very old) with little blood, or time; and you see them close to dying: then cauterize around many small cauldrons by pinching; afterwards leave it as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Because she will be close to dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire area covered in cauldrons, heat the cauldron with the shape on it:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand within the disease called "adubeleti" until the cauldrons have pierced the skin, and be such cauldrons that the patient feels behind them in a way that the flow of purification is directed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After treatment as long as it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The care of fire wounds with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way of disease there is which is called 'corrodens', and it's nothing but a mixture affecting the limbs, as dry thorns prick the fingers.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease present which can endure caustic fire therapy, then accordingly apply small and large cauterizations to the location as needed according to where the illness is; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all corruption, leaving nothing behind, ensure that everything which has been corrupted becomes ossified.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave for three days, and apply a poultice with oil until the fire-burns harden, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment with ointments causing joy
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days the wound does not heal properly, it is good; and if not, resume fire treatment on that which remains unhealed from rotten wounds.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this mixture is never treated with medicinal water in place of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already described the treatment for medicinal water in its section: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The use of pliers coming to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often it happens that behind the fingers a disease arises called "closed" in our thinking, and is a large swelling that troubles the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatment for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know fire cautery, and water cautery hot.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 It is a fire cautery that you heat as well as with water like one with a quill pen, and it should be made of good iron so it can reach the nail on all sides, and have fine edges; after heating it red hot over the nail, rotate your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the point where the blood flows from the nail; leave in this way for three days until pus begins to form; then make an poultice of good mustard boiled with salt, and let the poultice rest all night over the entire area, and the nail will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the location with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then if it turns towards the rear of the body and happens frequently in hands and feet, you must apply an aqua cautery with hot water; here is how: take a vessel made of copper or iron, or a vat handle, place it on the nail so that it covers all around, then put some warm water inside, hold your hand steady while applying pressure in a circular motion until the edge of the vessel touches the root of the nail, allowing hot water to reach deep up to the root; allow the patient to endure the sting of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it as is and all roots will wither away completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Then do another after the other, as you touch all those on the body, then heal them with salve that attracts worms.
li cure dou trembler	by. Then the s so please of the lithes:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of nerves, or fever quartan (quartan ague) or another ailment, it is necessary to make .iiij. cauterizations or .iv. on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the base, and one above the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will stop the trembling and remove the cause of the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Not visible by following behind, boils or impure pustules that come from large corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is necessary when they appear to do a small caustic on each head of the pustule: a subtle caustic from a mirtle wood stick, whose point has been lit with fire, or from an elongated root of aristologue, or lenticular caustic.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And never causticize at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow new ones in front, but the superfluity from which they come is broken, and they are clean; but it must be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is tied off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great bleedings from the artery that has been tied off near the wound's edge, or at an abscess incision, or during cauterization of a limb, and similar things; it is very harmful to let them bleed out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case if this occurs to you, quickly place your index finger over the wound's vein and strain it very much until blood ceases flowing from beneath your fingernail; then apply small and large olive oil cauterizations with fire as needed so that they all turn red; then take some (ointment), whether great or little according to the wound size and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery over the vein while you hold your finger in place until bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps back when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do one after the other until the blood flow is stopped; and be mindful not to burn the nerve near it, nor any further harm come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly stop it unless by one of the four methods we have said: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or with a strong thread, or with medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and be tied and strained simultaneously.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tightly binding with cloths or applying burning substances on top, or other similar things if it does not help much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in someone and they have no direction or medicine on hand, then you should put your thumb index over the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out so that blood rests above the wound and vein; do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often until the blood is congealed, engorged, and pooled; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgery treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicines, and pustules, causes, effluvia, and forms of cauterization; I have included those cases up to the fingers herein, and will proceed through this chapter by the same method for what is easier to understand.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be taken.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In the practice of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening a vein, making an incision into an abscess, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, which leads to death in some cases.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways in which people seek treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If they come from those who are so overwhelmed by their illness that they die easily due to the exhaustion of their disease and its severity; and one must have fear for these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among them are those who give up their sense, saying, "wait, I am in charge"; and the illness is despised.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather place greater trust in your honor than your desire and do not foolishly proceed from what you are certain of and have taken counsel on; use prognosis and indication in treating the ills of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will aid you in acheboring good reputation, glory, and memory in history.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to breathe of the holy inspiration from His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I order this treatise by sections as you see in the chapter on cauterization, from which I have advised about burning from head to feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water at its head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	That this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the child's head is too strongly constrained by the birthing canal; there has never been a case where it was successfully resolved without knowledge of its cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness in anyone other than children, and all whom I have observed it caused death swiftly; therefore, it seems to me that the treatise should be more diligently studied for such cases.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	by# s. Pruss.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is excessive, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in a cross-like manner according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are openings above each part of the head, and they swell forcefully when pressed by your hand inside: it requires that you make three incisions on top as follows.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision, remove all the pus forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After binding the wounds with cloths and powders, add wine and oil, and leave like this until the fifth day; then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to heal evenly, and let the patient eat dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is to observe where the head of the abscess and water are collected; for it never lies before, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the head of the abscess opens, and water is collected; proceed as you are able with what I have told you; but be careful not to puncture an artery; watch for bleeding fluidly so that the patient may die from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	To resume (to continue)
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there occurs in anyone a disease called "catarrh" affecting the eyes or the genitals, and the illness is longstanding, and medicinal treatment proves unhelpful, then the final remedy lies in the cautery with which one ties off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you see the wounds healing, have the patient lift his head; then rub it with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract the membrane covering the neck completely; next, look where the veins emerge from and behind each ear, they should be placed slightly apart; gently push back the veins, then cover one side with a piece of muslin cut in half widthwise so that it reaches to the bone, ensuring ample coverage.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see this, remove the strip from above the artery and cut it off as with two crossing knives.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, it bleeds continuously without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the artery does not open by feeling, it is necessary to measure the length of three thumbs, then tie up and push until reaching the bone; what must be placed in blood vessels amounts to six drams, with a possibility of more or less depending on what the patient can endure and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without any inflammation, and no suppuration appears, then strain the wound and close it, followed by ointment treatment until healed.
de emigrainne	For inflammation or swelling.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When early migraine comes, and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headache and similar things occur, one is treated with methods of medical care and it does not help at all, so we draw out the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have written.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of extracting them is such that the patient feels a return in the hairs of his temples and hears an opening in the artery within the temple, as it opens well from its pulsation. It is only slightly closed like in some men who are too cold; if reopened, the patient pulls out strips of cloth around them, then rubs the area with rough linen, and applies warm water until the artery manifestly appears again; then take the spatula as described:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then twist it open at both ends and secure with bandages placed under each part; if the artery is delicate, gently turn it using the tip of a pin, then treat that area according to the amount of blood lost measured in two spits.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not repaired, then all movement will cease entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the wound with vinegar until it heals in 12 days; and if the suture is large, it must be tied in two strong double threads of silk so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and blood flows through its length; then cut off the excess between the two sutures at the same time, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a caustic caustic until reaching bone as long as the head is closed; this is the final work, provided the patient does not have fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For caustics are helpful in finishing wounds; thus they are more beneficial for wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When extracting arteries, fill the cavity with old cotton and place well-made dressings; and when removing them, treat it with dry medications that produce char, and bandages until healed; and if the remnants of the vessel are as thick as you work on it, then quickly cauterize the area by caustic, or fill the cavity with vitriol and strain in your hand to make the wound cleanse, and apply cold water on the cavity until the vessel is frozen, and bandage the cavity with a cool water as long as it needs to be. And the aftercare of artery extraction is that you cauterize the opening of this caustic two parts, but the sharpness be well-made sure longer holders;
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When strangury is too tightly held, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a space as wide as one, and then when you have inserted both into their places, heat them with a glowing iron until they reach the bone, and tie off the vein in two ties; and let them be separated by the two edges so that this cautery is not too hot altogether; this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	From tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	; t.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 It is called the "old cure for contusions", and you should instruct the patient to have hair on their forehead; then make three equal cuts or incise according to the length of the forehead, with one incision running along the middle from top to bottom, and the others made at two-thirds of the width above the eyebrows. Avoid incising the arteries that are two-thirds upwards; hold your hand away from the extension of the jawbone by the length of three fingers; use a piece of sponge moistened with woolen cloth to apply pressure and stop the bleeding, then insert the spatulum here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is from the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the fat that is between the two incisions completely over the bone, then make a new cut from the middle incision towards the other end of the second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "culteral," and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And cut the ribs toward the chest at the root, and the ribcage toward the bone, and push until it reaches the midline opening.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And bandage all the vessels that descend from the head to their eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens at the chest, and then further down to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and express the lining for the blood taken; then put a wad of old cotton in each opening, and cover with cloths moistened in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring that no abscesses form; after three days release the ligaments, and provide a large amount of clean water drink, and treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies for treating wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	To examine the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come from acute catarrh commonly, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakened sight, and burning papillae; and hair falls out, and at times there is severe pain in front of them, and patients sneeze; then by these incidents one knows that such matters and those catarrhs do not come from any single vein, but rather multiple vessels are involved, and the cause lies within them.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And command the patient to rest his forehead against something, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one nearby.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 Begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make incisions up to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves at the temples when they move while eating; and once the bone is exposed, drain all blood onto a sponge, then carefully place cotton between the two edges of the incision. Then, wrap with moistened linens soaked in wine and oil, being careful to prevent heatstroke from an abscess; when it is set right, rub the bone until new growth begins, then apply healing salves that encourage hair growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat bran and four parts of cocyn grass seed, mix them together, and apply to the wounds to stimulate healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of eardrops
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains or beasts or stones like iron, or seeds like peas and lentils, or fluids flowing as easily as water and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear as a stone or any other matter not close to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, place the ear on the fire.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, then distill a small amount of violet oil or sage ointment and make an extraction; if it induces coughing, plug the nostrils when sneezes occur, and place cloth pieces or wool around the ear; position the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 This often leads to healing through this treatment; and if it does not lead to healing, then an extraction is done using fine tweezebrushes like so:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out due to pinchers, that's good; if not, prepare the extraction with a subtle double needle; and if it does not come through this, make an eel of iron and push its head into the hole or ear slit firmly, stuffing wax molten so that the veins cannot enter with the tube; then perform the treatment properly, as often the force comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a point of what is used for extracting animal beaks, and use some precise instrument, placing cotton inside; then press the glue on the wound or whatever, and apply the treatment properly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all the things we have said, quickly fracture the ear so that an abscess is there and pus comes forth, and swelling; and the manner of fracturing is to make the patient sit with their head between your hands, and turn the ear upwards, then make a small incision at the base or attached part of the ear near fatty tissue; and let the incision be as round as a crescent moon until it reaches the wound, then suture it as best you can, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's the form of this: and extract it make it so that are as the poisons. If not bee aministrade.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And perform an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have done it many times; then extract with fine forceps and a sucker, as we have said, so that extractions be gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the meantebe when it comes to the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And lay down on that same ear where he has vomited.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it comes out easily, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it does not come out easily, then take many small pieces according to the length and lightness of your needle, and warm them slightly over fire; place the patient's fingers on one side, while pressing against the stone from another direction with a pin, until all the moisture is removed and it comes out completely. If so, take some grain.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beastie if it is a small body like a flea or similar thing, treat as we have said in division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, prepare extraction with forceps; and it's easier to remove what is inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations and their treatment, if the remedy does not work, then examine the ear under the sun; if there are no visible worms, use fine tweezeburns, and if they do not appear, take the cone from which it takes shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And one must strip off above and widen below.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And carefully place the more delicate part in the ear according to the amount of the patient's pain, then gently press it thoroughly throughout; do this often until all the fluid is gone.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not allow the fluid to exit, then poke around the cotton bandage as I have described for the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, so administer instillations that the ancients have tried in incision of worms, and you will find or treat with irrigation; and irrigate your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It is made of silver or tinned copper at the bottom and over with holes to pour in, and on top for distilling; and to press the distillation through an instrument of well-made tin wire, so that you insert a needle and wrap it around with cotton as needed, then pour your oil or juice into the cone, and put whatever amount of medicine from your treatments into the ear, and let the cone be in the ear; then push the needle through all the cotton, and press with your hand briefly until the oil is distilled or collected out of the ear; and it smells to the patient inside, and make the distillations two boil so that it's distilled into the ear, but do not be too cold, for medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of eardrops
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no eardrums or ears; and the same thing happens to adults by a wound's bursting within the ear, and these ruptures come at one time fully in the ear so that they cannot be seen; and sometimes there occurs .i. small failure of sight, but the eyes see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore when it comes fully in such a way that one cannot see it, there is of good healing in various dispositions, and where one sees this, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammamation apparent, then the work has done all this space for which the shape exists.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be both before and behind all around flat, so that the ear does not bleed; if the inflammation is of a wound or body of the ear, then take with fine tweezebrs, and pull gently, until those cartilages are completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 When the obstructions are full in the ear, take a fine sharp tool and scrape gently at first, then place it on the edge of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If the patient feels an obstruction causing great ringing in their ear, pierce gently, and ensure you do not harm the nerves of the ear; then place a tent according to the size of the perforation in the ear, and apply meal in Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Aucun jour ne passe jusqu'à ce que la plaie soit guérie, alors prends une gaze et enduise-la avec de l'onguent rose d'eau, et saupoudrez-le de vitriol broyé ; et si tu vois le gonflement de ler oreille, il convient de changer la gaze pour en placer une autre mouillée dans du cerotage faite avec de l'huile rose et de la cire, jusqu'à ce que le gonflement ait diminué ; puis panser tant qu'il soit sain.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	Et si un saignement se produit, plonge une épongue dans l'eau froide et place-la sur la partie touchée, puis utilise les autres remèdes appropriés pour traiter le reflux de sang par des distillations qui soignent cette affection.
de la char des papieres	From the papers of Char
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This small althel that comes in papers when they are moist and dry, one must stretch them with tongs and forceps, then coat the bottom of a glass beaker with its roots; afterwards place it over vitriol paste.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	Pour ceux d’hauz à la voies: cauterise, puis les s’il est mires, eus de recoupe the altheluze avec pieces de paste, et lues a pluse a le paste; car tu çeples and li altes.
de la gresle	Of gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times come from the eyes something that appears gritty in its form and hardness, and for this reason, the disease is called "hailstorm," consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below the paper; the treatments are as follows: take care if hailstorm moves from one side to the other, and it's an easy thing to know; make it wider then gently scrape each part, then take with tweezeb
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, nothing is harmed to the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble a stitch for it, and treat until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply force, as the ointments will soon restore it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstorm is descending into the ear's depth towards the upper part, turn back the skin and extract with tweezers, sew it up and press on both sides; and if the skin has been moved by the incision, nothing harms; but when the hailstorm has been cooped, give a salty water oil to drink, and cure the hollow of that which causes irritation until healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Excoriation is a fat that forms in linen and papers above the skin, occurring mostly in children with no one else, causing great distress to their eyes, and they come upon cataracts in the morning, and cannot look at sunlight because tears hasten to their eyes; therefore they lie on their faces downward, sleeping while moisture covers them, and excoriation appears as a changed appearance of the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you push its place with your hands, feeling an exit between bones.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of the procedure is that the patient places his head in your hand. Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach contained on each side, then place it over it; and press with both thumbs from one side and another so that the exinach comes together within the circle; then make a small incision in the moist skin using a sharp blade, ensaturating:
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the entire piece of cloth between your two fingers and twist your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to press at the tear, that you do not move all together up to the head, so that you do not squeeze it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the protrusion does not appear at the beginning of the tear, slightly stretch the tear until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with linen and water, and place on the wound, and bandage securely.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And for such patients who grind their teeth and put something upon them to spoil the moisture that remains lodged there.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat until it becomes sound again.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there comes an abscess hot at the place, then use of poultices to soothe until it becomes sound again.
des poilz des papieres	From hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper in a manner different from their nature and become aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about customary diseases like tearing up and softening of the paper as well as mildew, until it causes destruction to the eyes; there are cures according to four methods: either by fire cautery together with heat, or medicine for ague as described in this chapter on cautery treatment, and is made using incision and stitching or with cantharides, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the head of the patient in your hand; then turn the paper with its oil side towards your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that's good; if not, you should put a needle through each thread just underneam: and do this either at the margin of the paper or where hair grows near these strands. Then pull one thread across all the paper from the great edge to the small corner; then remove it from beneath the paper and close up the entire area around the paper, from the large edge to the smallest. After that, cut a single thread and place a small patch of cotton fabric underneath the paper, then cover the paper with an encaustic figure as if you're inflating bellows; and in any case it must be done according to how much hair is raised on the entire paper surface visible.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is a case that requires you to use a large quantity of the paper based upon how softened the paper becomes; then place it across all the affected area within the II lines that you have marked out, and start from the great hairline up to a little distance; so let the incision be close to the natural roots in the growth pattern of a root, then insert the needle into one of the II corners with its edge, then scrape it all off; then suture together the two edges using a single thread of fine linen, and drain any blood, and remove excess filaments from around both eyebrows by applying various sticky substances if you so wish to do this; but otherwise, have no concern about it, leave the stitches and threads until III or IIII days; then treat the wound without using drying and constrictive dressings, for the paper re-adheres with healing of the wound and its unification, although the suture is movable (as the old ones say), and it is a procedure devoid of fear; and if there's another way: and that you shape the paper into a form similar to the mushroom spore bag as we have described, with III needles punctured according to the pattern shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then shape like this way of pierce in a hole two small; and then. Qui li fesse the figure is like this, so done into holes de la forme comme nos avons ainsi the form as it is shown as we have made a for to follow the thus hole according li fuelle la ours forme qui semblable:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the piece is not equal, then take a needle or one with thread, and tie it in the middle of the figure; and tie another thread near the large molar, and the second thread near the small one, and place between your two threads equally; then raise your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you have sutured, as we have described, then unite the two edges of the wound by stitching, and treat until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe with cerote and similar ointment; and there are times when the hairs of the paper become inverted: in such cases, you must do what we have said about the incision; but both stitching methods are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the wounds is as follows: and you must fold the paper and insert it inside according to what I have said, then make two stitches with a thread, and two fine strings as long as the hair and the width of the gutter are; then hold the heads of both threads by the parts where you tie the threads. Then neatly sew the one and the other on top of that lies above the paper oil, and pull out the two stitches from the two parts entirely; and leave it like this for some days until the skin heals and scars and shrinks and hardens, as long as they come out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed and the wound has been exposed to forces, then heal until it is sound; and if the sore becomes united and swelling occurs with paper covering it, preventing hair growth; and this is the form of II cords that you shall make according to this figure, and in this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	For the treatments are such that you take a fine needle, and tie one thin silk thread on it; then join the heads and wrap them together delicately, enscuing their lengths equal to a palm in length; then arrange in sequence another subtle fine silk thread briefly, and wind around the main thread; then place the patient's head in your hand and be near sunlight so that the treatments can be seen clearly, for they are subtle and small operations; then insert the needle through the entire length at the root of hair closest to skin, carefully piercing the paper until you run it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the shaft, and place in sequence that hair if there is one or two or three or more; then continue pulling with your hand until all hairs are moved along the thread with their natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the shaft is treated and hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the thread from below along all the thread that you arranged, until the shaft moves upwards through its root and can be seen by oil; then again you pull the shaft and the thread, trimming off two or three days or more as needed, until the hair takes hold in its place and grows over it. And if the hairs are short, add a long natural wavy hair, keep it alongside that which thou leavest it, as far as to let it grow outward and then lift it up:
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the decay of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When the disease called "aleacrati" or oiliness occurs in the eye, if there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens by sudden wounds, cutting or burning, and through similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of treatment is that you split the union, separate its lips, and put in lin threads inside, allowing it to heal until sound; and nothing but things that dry and restrict should be used on it for care.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but it works like softening substances such as fenugreek; and rose of water or elevated wheat seed extracts cooked, and anointments with dill oil dissolved in any type of oils, wrap one tent, and cure that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your care is to ensure it does not shift from its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely remedies for this disease, so that it may return in its previous shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the pus which comes through the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease called "axacrati," is true and natural as well as accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and tears and cauterization and similar things; the method of treatment is such that you should use a needle with double thread, insert it into the hole, and pierce all the way to the left until right, so that both threads come out at the head; then the sheath extends above the entire length of the needle, ending in a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the shape of the paper returns as it should, that's good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the crack, turn the paper, and make two cuts within the paper; let the head of the shoulder be at the two angles of the incision you have made, so when they are joined together, its shape is like that of a letter with an "N" crossbar; then remove that bar as needed according to how far out the paper extends and contracts from it, then bring the separated parts close together, and stitch them up with woolen thread; then apply what we have said about softening medicines and bandages until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a fissure or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a clean cut just below the hairline of the paper, and according to what has been said above; then between the two edges of a tent as I have described; and you must treat the injury according to its form because it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters employ all possible means to help restore the figure back to its natural state; and for patients, likewise, depending on what treatment and applications are required in various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	If the illness comes from a fissure or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make clean cut just below hairline of the paper, according to possible means all employ its state; and li masters wise as I have described applications various conditions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering occurs in human hands such that the paper above is well-adhered with the egg white, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it must be pierced at the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lifted upwards; and hold steady with clamps until you scrape off what has hardened into the delicate spatulamine, which is neither too rough nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer from overly aggressive or blunting the oil; and make your incision gently, allowing the assembly to reform according to its natural shape; ensuring it's whole, without causing fresh blood in dirty water, then rinse with soft clear water and colander; afterwards place a linen tent between paper and oil, and cover the oil with mull soaked in warm whey; after three days use the colander again and other remederals until healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It is divided into two methods: one that it can be nervous and the other is smooth, but a certain kind of bainnee conserve them as you needle; thus to cut as the paper, which may not be sharp, and the poignet le croie li cure et l’oller en la chas.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of the incision is such that the patient places their head in tune with your hand, then you work the eyes; lift the paper to your hand, then clip the nail clippers slightly thinner; extend it upwards; then take a needle and insert horsehair, or goat, or ox hair; and use a strong thread. Double the tip of the needle a bit and embed in the nail fold, piercing through the entire needle, tie the nail with a thread, extending upward, scrape all the way to the edge of the nail where the prickly part and the silk hair reach until the top head; cut off any remaining stubble at the root of the crescent gently, leaving the natural or root bone so that through the incision it does not typically seep. And never do you stretch just the nail with a clip, but only with the thread as we have said; then scrape until all the crescent is smoothed:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure that the crescent does not touch and break the skin layer, and that the prickly part is not pierced; after the incision, pour in a bit of burnt seal oil and also make a mixture with litharge coating, and leave it until the next day. Then cure whatever needs to be done until it heals properly.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle, and the knobs do not fit in, this type of fake nail has often been treated with medicines; they grow as I described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the oil for the patient, and take the spatula lightly cut according to this method:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and there is irritation afterward, distill from your mouth into an oil collier made of leadwort and red wax resin mixed with spelt bran, and apply the oil until the next day; then continue the other procedure as in this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil opposes you, as in case of a hot abscess, then dress it first and cure the hot abscess until it is clean, then continue the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh at the elbow hinders movement greatly by causing harm, suspend it with a splint, and bandage part but not all, so that tears do not come; then flows into the arm red pus which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the powder that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 It is necessary for some men to use red powder, cover the wound and bind it with bandages until healed, which appears like a rose of balustrade; and thus in this work the patient should place his head on the pillow, then treat the hairs, and make all those parts pliable as needed, and support them with strength; then remove the first layer, and shave it completely to the end, ensuring not to cut during treatment; and create an incision in a similar manner to the one mentioned for fingernail trimming and small forces used to detach hairs, as after this technique is demonstrated by this chapter; and when the incision is completed and all parts are removed, apply oil of sage or where you distil red cordial and corrosive medicines, and place cotton with a wad in it, ensuring certainty against heat from infection; if there remains nothing, and the scab forms, cover the area and treat the hotspot with soothing substances for abscesses; then return to your procedure until healed, thus all parts are restored using this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you balance the use of each weak oil from the natural way; and in cases of accidental injury, using iron treatments; and do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that this limb has recovered from the treatment.
des voines des eulz	From veins within the body
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 These are red veins that lie beneath the skin and affect its appearance and weaken the eye constantly.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, when you first examine the eye in which sebel is present along with fat, and there are no other diseases besides sebel; then instruct the patient to place his head against your hand like this: have him squeeze out those veins entirely on the edge according to your wisdom, and let the veins be subtle double as per this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there shall be two veins looped by degrees into one of the arms as follows:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you shall carefully loop those subtle veins and draw blood every hour until you see them removed from the eye area; and be careful not to bleed the tips of the eyelash grooves, and perform this procedure at midday before sunlight, being very focused on your work so that only these veins are bled; and once you have done this, distill in the eye's collar a green and red liquid to disrupt whatever remains from the red spots.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot grasp all of this in that hour, apply an ointment soothing the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the patient feels confident about a boil, then resume according to this method above until they are well; and this is how strength is restored.
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mires called "arissati" fistules: when you treat them with cautery and medicine according to what I have said before, if they are not healed, then make an incision over the boil where it must die off, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see corruption and darkness, return it to all the instrument from which its form came; called "sharp head," made of fine iron, with one end sharpened like a file in this present shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it back onto the bone with decay, then turn it between your two fingers, and press slightly with your hand until you know that the decay has been resolved; do this multiple times before replenishing its location with curative herbs.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the leus is swolpress and hardened, and the body of the wound is also swolpressed, and remains so for 40 days, without healing or forming pus, and no complications occur since it is healthy; if not, there is no other remedy than to reset the fistula at the nose's outer edge as per this method: And open the bone a second time with iron and medicinal agues, and when it has opened up, take an I-shaped instrument according to this method, and let the head of the iron be III-angled, and the rod being thinned down to the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone near the temple and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn back until you pierce the bone and feel what happens to the patient as if they hold their hand against their nose; and thereafter restore the position with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when a crack forms and hardens on the bones, let the material go near the nose; it is an easier thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the oil (pus)
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the nails are torn through all over and it does not come to disturb the kidney or shrinkage, then you bind the sickly; then cleanse them, then put on compresses or bandages without iron that can be pierced to drain, then apply oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolum. Then strain the pus, and place a plaster over wounds with cloths and linens; and managing the cloths so you pick light enough cloths sufficiently softened by twofold each (i.e., doubled), then put one on top of the other according to as much as the pus has need; then strain it using a hard plaster, and again start leachers for draining without piercing them; then remove the compresses and let the pus stand all day and night, and if you see it softens much, so that you should be removed. Then remove it after the oil returns, is good; or else repeat as does not return plasters, cloths of the (it heals; and s:
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a bandage applied
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the applied bandage, then open and arise from fragments as if a grain of resin, and are visible to see; therefore you shall view it closely; then surgery is performed such that one inserts a needle at the root of the part below until there is another on the upper side; or where there is double thread of the forehead; and pierce through it; leaving the first needle according to its arrangement; then cut off the double thread in place, and tie up an end of the bandage around it, and hold it tightly; then extract the needle and apply a moistened swath abundantly over it; and leave until the threads tear through the bandage, then treat with soothing things as long as the wound is healed; and at no time should the wound be restrained by the bandage in any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give a significant appearance, pierce at the subtle base which comes in through the forehead and follows the white moisture and descends into the eye, and enters immediately; then extract it as soon as possible until healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called 'alcunnati' is not just water that has assembled in the socket, resembling clear flowing down; it is not pure water at all; and its appearance during treatment is such that you make the patient sit on a specially prepared seat straight, then take the head between your hands for two parts, and move until you see the bow coming to the surface of your eyes; then let it be driven in, and ensure that the light does not escape, and observe what happens as usual to the patient; if it does not come out from below, know that it is pure water, and if the alignment of the bow is not set up as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Place the patient between your hands to sit, then take fine spatula and perform along the corneous membrane just slightly; while continuing with the conjunctiva of the corneal tissue until it is done; when completed, pour into anointment hot water mixed with honey or water and fenugreek boiled and melted, then apply further treatment as needed until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of waters from the eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have seen the resemblance of water in its flowing nature and what it requires to be cut properly; working according to health conditions.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary for you to have the patient sit between your crossed hands facing away from light and sun, holding their eyes tightly; then place the oil paper in your left hand if the eyelids are on the right or in your right hand if they're on the left; then take with your right hand (if the eyelids are on the left) an instrument called "almagda," or with your left hand if they're on the right. Then, put the tip of the instrument near the edge of a ray in the center part of oil to the smaller outer rim; then push the almagnada instrument forcefully and turn your hand until it pierces through the paper into the oil, feeling as though almagna reaches an empty space; the width of the almagda path should be at the fullest measure of the space from where the prunele ends to the end of the noirour, which is the cornea. You will see bones in that clear paper through the translucency of the corneal tissue, and gently place the instrument right there or where the water is, then extract it with another method afterward.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If water flows now, see the patient before him and the instrument at its place.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting briefly, and the water rises through the second channel, position the instrument with it, and when it is firmly in place and does not rise, gently twist around a little bit by moving your hand slightly; then return some crushed emerald to moisten within its cavity.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert the receptacle or linen soaked in oil and abundant with egg yolk, and bind it to the healthy cavity.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our era, apply compresses with an abundance of egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And indeed pierce the conjunctiva slightly, but not too deeply, but make it subtle; then apply crushed emerald as we have said; and at the completion of the work provide the patient with an agreeable bed to sleep on his back in a dark place; he should be bound from all movements, eat light foods, keep his head still, neither turning left nor right, following his condition until the third day; then discharge him into the same dim room, examine his vision, and show him various things; after that reattach the ligature up to the seventh day; it is not necessary for you to do this during or immediately after the procedure, but you should elevate it because the fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess is present, on the sixth day remove the oil in front of it, and apply warmth to soothe the abscess; and once it is calmed, close the wound and place a bandage over its face for several days, keeping it in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 Then gradually exit the house and become one of them; know that no novices should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Apply the oint soi qui tu est ardre de nos que tu esoie te tesmoient, nul leus a li vant se veut conter lor pais ne pas on les dous onsue que tu s’est parfait, mais quaies et prist ; et la terse en faus ei qui descez.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of amalgamation because those who do not know them regard them as such; and they are indeed mixtures.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let there be the essence of this same subtlety, and its counterpart in three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	From the cartilage at the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 At no time do various abscesses arise, of which there are some that appear like many scorpions with pus; and if such exists or has an infected wound filled with bright-colored pus, and it is swollen near the bone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case for these joints which are loose and not dislocated, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and work on their nostrils, and pour anointing oil into those joints, and bind them tightly; then wrap with a spatula of fine silver on one side until you know that entire joint is bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If anything remains that cannot be closed, apply all the subtle remedies lightly, ensuring nothing is left; and if there is swelling or an abscess, treat it as required; and if malignant abscesses are present, quickly cauterize until they are cleaned out and bones exposed, then pour water, oil, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If the method does not work and moisture reaches near the palate, know that it is safe; and if moisture does not break through as needed, know there is no joint in bone above, where inflammation does not come to heal: then you must tie a linen thread slightly thickened, and keep it wet between your fingers, with space of a thumb or less; place the patient's ears under the end of the filament as best possible, and draw through odorantly until it passes within the mouth. Many times children in schools are treated this way, making it an easy task for those who know how to do so; then hold the head that comes out through the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with another hand, knowing each one after the other as we hold the filament.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this until you know that the worms have corrupted their blood, then draw out the blood, and moisten the thread with an Egyptian unguent, and return it to its place as before; do this for three days or more, so that the ointment dissolves whatever remains of the blood-corruption; then put a pouch of plaster on it for several days until it is healed, and if dry medicines are needed, use them; this is the way to purge the head, which allows distillation of oils and medicines into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	things as are the in, and s. 1 so
de la char sor le neis	From the cartilage at the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times arises at the top of the neck a disease called "tellus," which grows and becomes visible until it can be seen; therefore, it is necessary to cut it out from the beginning, removing all the bone strongly, then placing the cautery or hot medicine on it; if it is not removed promptly as it grows large, take heed if it is hard, of sick color, lacking sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an incurable boil, for when it is cut even once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the boil is from a severe irritation, not of sick color, and you see that all can be covered, then relieve the patient and cut without fear, curing dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut and healed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when continuous blood flow occurs in one of these cerebral membranes, it is not beneficial and sometimes causes harm to some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then indeed when this happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew up both edges of the cut, and treat until it heals; and if the edges are torn apart on either side, one must scrape off all parts of their skin so they heal, then bring together both edges of the cut, and tie, and powder over powder with dragon's blood, and burnt incense; and put over the powders a piece of aloes of strong or another kind of aloes, and let it exude through itself, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitching is that you assemble the sutures: by needles as we have said in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When dense abscesses occur, resembling grains of pepper, small and large; then it is necessary to return the lips, cut on each side with tweezebeak, and grasp in each part; then place the liquid after vitriol incision dripping until it cools off; then provide relief and treat dryness around it until it heals.
de la char des gencives	From the decay of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often arises on the gums decayed, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary to hold them with pincers, cut at their root, and let blood or sanguine flow; then apply vitriol incision, or other powders that restrain and dry out; if that decay returns after the incision, and often happens again, re-capping and cauterizing: it does not return after the cautery; these are the forms of ulcers to heal.
des sordens	Of sorrows
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At no time are they gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, sores that are ugly and sharp; nor do the teeth become black and yellow or blue until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell bad. It is necessary for you to have the patient sit in your hands, with their heads on your altar, and pull out loose teeth or sores as they appear, until nothing remains; then make it black and green, and yellow and other colors until they are healed; and if anything that was at first reason is removed, it is good. If not, start again from the second day to the third, until you have everything extracted; and know that teeth need various kinds of medications for recovery according to what the work shows, because the rasor whose teeth fail frequently require different forms than those whose teeth are between the gums; these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you delay the grinding as long as possible, because it must not always be done; for this is a very high substebisituations such that there are no excuses for extracting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is unable to breastfeed, one must be certain of the teeth erupting.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the pain troubles the patient, and he believes it to be a root of a tooth or gum disease, and tries pulling the rotten tooth; however, the pain does not leave until the evil forces are removed, as we have done before for such cases; and when you are well sure about the tooth aching, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth completely, strongly guarding the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or fine pliers slightly at first, until it is properly aligned, then firmly hold the pliers; and let the head of the shoulder be in thy saintly space between thine elbangs, and let it rest so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight and breaking it, if it does not bleed, take any of these emollients and apply them gently inside both sides, then move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and swollen, it must be filled with gauze where the gums are; and delicately wedge it with pincers so as not to break while extracting; it must be carefully worked around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And do well to ensure that you do not break it and leave a part behind, for the patient will suffer greater pains from the root's evilness again.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And be aware not to do as ignorant barbers who, through haste and recklessness, often break the jawbone, without applying what we have mentioned; instead they bring great disease due to painful roots that remain or because of the bone they break, as we have often seen. When a tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol there; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the strands, to which one must move the ends first, are with long points and thick knots, so they do not double when you pull the thread; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members such that they do not bend when pulled, and made of well-crafted iron wire, with teeth for easy handling.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the strands
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains after fraying, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in butter at that spot for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 As long as the eye is softened, then apply the pincers called "algèfre", which make the head appear like a doctor's spatula; and inside they are made similarly to a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you expose the flesh entirely around the root and use the instrument called "althali", which is a lever of this form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And make it long and thick so that it does not break, and if the root protrudes through this, it is good; but if not, use all the instruments, from which these shapes come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument that has two tines, here is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other things related to swellings, and this instrument which appears like large pincers, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument should not be able to break; there are many swellings of swellings; and other instruments that are not counted as such. The wise master craftsmen discover by themselves their tools according to their works and the illness shows them so, for there are various diseases or no previous teacher provided an instrument for its variety, and it does not break on the wheel or other bones where they fracture; then seek swelling instruments as I have told you, and aid with gestures - this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and hold well to grasp the bone without slipping, but also to grip it firmly and remove it; then restore its original position with suitable medicines for that purpose. If there is rot in the bone, and it's small, you have all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with natural law, and the shape is unattractive, especially in maidens, it must be known if the root exists behind the tooth, and is neither straight nor properly placed; then file it down. And if there's a nerve accompanying the tooth, take this instrument whose form is as shown here with a small beak, and should be made of iron pointed at both ends:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And grip the instrument lightly for days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others; if it is possible to file it down, then grind with a portion as shown in this form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also as the grinding of needles; and gently grind the tooth a little each day until it can be removed; then smoothly finish with a file, ensuring that if the root is too sharp and cuts the tongue, you must grind down its harshness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the tooth is knocked out or by falling and the patient cannot press on that which they bite because it causes them to vomit, having been treated with constricting medicines but without effect; then bind them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rust, but gold never moves. The filament should be of medium thickness, not too thin or too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see that they are misaligned, take the wire and wind it twice around both healthy teeth, then place the head in between the teeth on either side, until you securely reach as far as the adjacent healthcuous tooth. Then resume covering up to the part where you began, and gently but firmly retract your hand, ensuring no movement; also ensure the wire is secured at the root of the affected tooth so it cannot slip out.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then clamp the head of the bone with pincers, and join them, positioning between a healthy tooth, ensuring it does not touch the tongue; then leave in place as tightly as possible for as long as it can stay, and if dislocated, wind the wires around, secured by another wire; if kept in this way throughout its term, it forms two new teeth and shapes like freshly placed healthy teeth and two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And if the teeth fall out, put them back in freshly as we have said; do not interfere with someone who is neither wise nor patient, and never create a shape like an animal's tooth bone, place it where there is a gap, and restrain it as previously instructed, staying this way for long periods.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of the tie of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Never is this type of wire that comes from the tongue or nature placed as such; sometimes due to accidental wounds; and the procedures are done so you work on the patient's mouth with their head in its proper position, and lift the tongue; then cut off the nervous wire along its length until the tongue is separated from its place, and if there is hardness or moisture, it is a consequence of a sore wound, where you twist up the wire at that point; and ensure the fissure does not become too wide for the artery beneath; after which, lift the lump of blood-red or cold water and apply it easily, then place a linen tent under the tongue; each night anoint the patient so that sleep cannot settle.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 When the flow of blood persists, place vitriol poultice on it; if bleeding continues, apply slow-burning caustic to it, which is good for this purpose; then treat with other remedees until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be colored or black and hard, do not touch it as the patient does not feel it, for it is cancer; and if it starts to sink inwards with moisture, pour onion water over it, and treat it from all sides with a fine syringe, and free it from both ends; and if it persists after your treatment, apply vitriol paste until it heals completely, then return to the previous treatment until you have treated thoroughly; then raise the gauze of eased and ease water, and continue other treatments until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Never does a throat swelling called "godath" occur, which are properly the two almonds; and when you treat them as we have described in our division, if not healed, be cautious: if it's an abscess of little sensitivity and soft color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for bleeding; but let it be until healed, then you will cut it out as it may break on its own; and if it's of pale color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument to cover it up, but first ensure that the abscess is well rested and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and their head be in your hand, and work the mouth and press the foreskin between his hands, and press the tongue from all parts of the instrument; and it should be made of silver or fine iron as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	, asse tu thet cest en pus to let not prise ande ate; then be angrys.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	When you do not have this instrument at hand, use a pair of pliers, which is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and when you have caught up one of the almonds, cut the other in a similar manner, then after the incision gargle the patient's throat with warm water, vinegar, saltwater, and if blood discharge occurs, gargle again with warm water or grated pomegranates or myrtle leaves; until the wound is healed. And no other abscesses appear in the throat except for the two almonds, so cut them as well.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman with an abscess inside her throat, that is to say a small abscess; and so tightly closed the entire throat that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had risen twice by way of the two small openings.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I immediately approached and inserted it in the left nostril, then moved the instrument forward, taking a large portion of wax; then repositioned it elsewhere on the nose near the eyes, opened the mouth, and pressed down the tongue; afterwards I placed the catheter into these abscesses, entered one partially, and only a small amount of blood flowed out; thus was removed the obstruction in the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, continuously extracting from that abscess for long periods; as the abscesses would grow again, filling up the space I had emptied, until they became very large; then I deceived it and cauterized within her throat: thus it remained without growing. I departed from these areas, leaving only God to act upon them afterwards.
de l’uve	From the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When they return to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it should be called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it should be called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is healed as we have explained in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess head has calmed down and becomes subtle, then you should drain it; and if it is round but not long, and it is of blood color or flesh-colored or black, you should perform an incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it as I have described in terms of its appearance and length, seat the patient facing the sunlight, press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull downward, and drain at one-third from either side that I have said in the incision of two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you do not cover the excess beyond the natural limit; because if you cover too much, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, apply as we have said in the incision of two almonds, and heal until it is healthy again.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient has fear of covering, then you must apply the method for alleviating their fear in cauterization.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of cauterization is to treat with acute ague.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient must place their head in your hands, and then press their tongue against the instrument that we have said for the cauterization chapbook, moisten with freshly boiled water so it is not too thick or too clear; and insert the probe of this instrument as follows.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	What is the ouem sont l’est tout lemeet, si que tu met les coure lemede ce qui emmet en la medecle. Si tu coumest li est toutes le mte coure eltie luesse li medicine tous les cheut neant de coute coton le poutrescument sont ceste li venter, si que les .i ques tellel et mete ceulements qui tout ce la medec:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is better than the incision, not the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and ysope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of these in a pot, and set on fire easily, and the pot well glued with strong clay, and within the pot have an instrument tied according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And whether of silver or copper, and whether one eye is pushed into the mouth so that vapor rises to the vein until it becomes inflamed; after frequent returns, until the vein heals and dries, and ensure you do not start at the onset of a hot abscess's development, as many things can happen; and do not perform this when there is a decline in a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and insert into the head of a feather, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; because the feather's shaft does not cause vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure and healthy together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Take a lor poignant la morsure qui se tierz les pais:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	When the inflammation is bent at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and watch to ensure you do not touch the epiglottis, as it may swell or move bones within; gently guide where the patient places the instrument because they will use muscles or the area is sore; then push upward or pull downward uniformly throughout all of the instrument until it feels firm.
de la sansue de la gorge	For throat swelling
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Never is there medicine without suction, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look into the patient's throat with sunlight, and press his tongue against the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see suction, grasp it with all your small hooks or fine pincers that are appropriate for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if it is not suitable, take a reed tube and insert it into the patient's throat, then quickly remove the tube as often as needed.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient has consumed too much water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full cup of cold water and work on the mouth, causing it to feel as if swallowing, and move it often with his hand; and if soon after suction feels the water, let it flow out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 If it does not come out as we have said, gently warm the patient with aromatic substances using the instrument I mentioned in the smoke treatment of wine; do this many times, for it will gradually become less painful.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The manner of the smoke treatment is to place a pot where there are charcoal briquettes and cover it with a metal container, piercing through which the head of the instrument can be inserted; then you pour your fumigation into it, and the patient places the pan's handle in their mouth, sealing it so that no smoke escapes but instead goes up to the nasal cavity. The nasal cavity will now become more receptive, and if nothing comes out, begin the smoke treatment again multiple times; the patient must endure thirst, eating unsavory things and salts, and not drinking water; eventually it will be necessary for them to expel what is needed through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used for throat treatment is such that it can be seen to resemble curved pincers designed for entering the throat; and like a physician's spoon, and it has roughness from lime so that whatever it grabs cannot escape. And here are its proportions:
li chapistres des apostemes	The form is made of instruments resembling a physician’s tool, such as it grains, and does not:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many kinds of abscesses, as recalled in this book from one and another, which come through puncture and cutting; there are two ways to treat them - one is the same kind but because it retains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for wounds where they lie in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 because an abscess on top is different from that at the base, and an abscess within a muscle is different from one in joints, each has its judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if an abscess is not to be punctured until the swelling is completely healed; and for those that need to be pierced when they are ripe, and do not swell according to their completion, like an abscess near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When an abscess comes near joints and is left to ripen around it, sometimes the tissue and nerve of the joint may be ruined, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 If the abscess is near the main limb and you delay perforation until it dies, it will harm the principal limb; if it is near the foundation, pierce without waiting for it to die entirely; but one should only perforate when digestion of the abscess is complete, especially if near the foundation, ensuring it does not burst from all sides and extending within, forming a fistula.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And the pain and the9412-380.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that swell, depending on the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 When an abscess is ready for incision, it should be allowed to undergo full digestion before cutting, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce through it, there will be spread throughout the body its poisonous blood and it is full of much filth; and by chance, the lips harden and its deep cavities.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the body's size, according to what the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is fitting to treat small abscesses with small punctures and large abscesse
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, as a superficial abscess above, it is necessary that you puncture it easily; and when the abscess is large, and has formed a great swelling, and you puncture it, do not drain all of the pus at once but only part; then bandage the abscess until the next day, then avoid any further action; perform this process gradually more each time, until the swelling is fully drained; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman carrying, or small children, or elderly and decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the expectorant occasionally jumps with the discharge of pus, which may cause the patient to die; do not be concerned.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cleanse this treatise with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, then open the wound, and check if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a clean size, then dress it with linen or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many points, make sure each tent touches the other as they heal; and if you have sutured part of the skin around the abscess, it must be filled with old cotton or wool from linen cloth without moisture, up to the third day; then remove the stitching, and apply ointment until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs on your wound, treat with cold and soothing water, and cover the area with damp cloth, applying it repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bleeding persists, treat properly and apply care, and use the powders mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or spring, and the wound or abscess site is very sensitive, you should cover with linens soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it's summer, and the area is fleshy, then cover with wet linens in water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day as we have said; and then drain the abscess and extract the pus, and treat accordingly until healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is essential to know for treating abscesses; now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses appear on the head, there are ways of dealing with them that resemble nests, just as one would remove feathers from a hen, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are those with fat and similar substances that have moisture like feathers; and there are others which are hard and painful to cut, without any doubt if the arrow does not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the art of dilation is to try with all instruments called "intromissors," from which the shape comes afterward, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, they bend over too far along.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains the moisture, for it returns as soon as you leave it; then soak a cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, use water and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; this will cauterize what remains attached.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And so begin the bandaging again as before, on the second day and third, ensuring it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess is filled with pus, follow this method: lengthen it; and pour in antiseptic ointments, and scrape off all scabs, and apply your entire treatment to cleanse the area where it resides; and if the arrow acts contrary, do as I have instructed you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat an abscess if it is pus-filled, and the lancing and cleansing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the incision on a pus-filled abscess with much fluid is easier because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and among those abscesses that I cut or the head of an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and lichenous, and could not break; and had it been struck by anyone, one would have similarly made a wound like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads that come from the head of children and at the roots of ears, if you open it on the most dependent part as early as possible so that moisture can escape, treat them as needed.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and below the shoulders, and in angles; they never come elsewhere or to other parts of the body, and there are many, and they are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula properly originates within its quarter of the body, as with ulcers and abscesses in the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others that harbor maladies unwilling to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In that case where you see good constitution at the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, not arising from either side nor related to the veins or vessels, and is not deep; then it should be skinned on top, and have each part scraped off, and spread out the two lips near the glands as in boils of the head; and tease it slowly and gradually, while being careful that you do not scrape a nerve or vein, nor is there any hardened pus or tenacious matter to be removed so that fingers don't get stuck, and do not cut too deeply before knowing what should be removed.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you open the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, then apply vitriol paste on the wound or powders that cause bleeding, and tighten the wound; leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound becomes softened and starts to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood is stopped, return to your work until it is completed; then follow your manual as if there are no small scrofulous swellings, and treat them accordingly.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofulous swelling, do not cut that scrofulous swelling at its base, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm; then apply an ointment made from Egyptian cotton to the wound, then heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut out the entire swelling, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and hold them together now so that there is no excessive overlap due to the size of the swelling.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 If it is necessary, you should remove the root and pull out the thorn, and close the wound as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those swellings that have excessive overlap should be punctured where the opening seems to close most easily; and pierced in the same way as previously mentioned, then dressed with ointment and similar things if they prevent healing from corruption; and when the wound is thoroughly cleaned, apply an aromatic oil dressing until it heals soundly.
de squinance	When you have to be cleansed with myrrh:    cleaning with aromatic substances so that what remains from afterward  as previously mentioned; then ointment and dress the wound is thoroughly clean it scrofulas, with herbalsam deemed ointment of and cure until healing.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and told of the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinching, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat called "epiglaster" be cleared; and this cannot be done by this method because all veins and the main cause of heat in the patient's mouth, or throat or two almonds are present.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid destruction from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 It is necessary therefore that when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should split it from three circles or four with a small cut across, between two circles or by the quantity of the cut through the sack; and those vessels are long enough for the sectioning of the ep groat so there is no haemorrhage, and the veins are ample.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, then he should extend the girdle of the throat to its full length, and split the flesh until it reaches the windpipe; and watch for blood vessels, but if you see nothing, cut the sack as we have said; and proven by the division of the fume from the windpipe which escapes through the upper part that is broken, and due to the loss of voice; and leave the open wound exposed.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time is over with which one doubts the strangling, gather the two lips of the wound at its base, and tie a bandage all around sensing the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce heat until it is safe.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Until the throat is completely cleared of blood and clots, do not perform this procedure; otherwise, the patient may be judged to be near death, with lack of air.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then you shall cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they respire through the wound, thus it is guarded against death; and for this reason, those with knowledge instruct to leave the open wound until the illness has passed, which takes three or four days, then order to sew up the wound and treat, until it is healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I witnessed a maiden took the knife and cut it into her throat, cutting off part of the thyroid gland; and I was called to cure her, and found her in such a state as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood had come from it; indeed, it was evident that neither vein nor artery served as a passage to the throat, and the windpipe lay open through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastened, sewed the wound, and treated her until it was healed; but for the maiden there resulted only a reddened voice, which returned to normal afterwards; therefore, I say that in the treatment of the epiglottis, there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	Of a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and they are large abscesses with the color of jet, and occur mostly in women; there are two ways: natural and accidental, where natural does not have a cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental type is twofold: one resembles pus of our flesh, and the other resembles an abscess that comes from us through arteries; there is fear, and it does not require using force except in small cases, and test thoroughly for everything involved: if you find it similar to the aforementioned pus, and without causing any vein damage, then proceed as one would with hairs, treating it completely throughout its length, ensuring there are no points; examine carefully, and treat accordingly so that it is healed perfectly.
des nous	; �re est: C-C eXe : the bentide ne tre t esstf: they de laugh by a, et ce faire leli sept. If you said e c on the acr leur.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 There are many ways to treat us, which I will tell all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between ours and its exit.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the fever and heat are present until they boil over, and it has subsided and completed decay; then rests the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With ours there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains it syphilis, which is its own sac and follows the body's natural hue, and begins similarly to a jet of lead, growing in size; and they are according to two appearances, either grain-like or moisture-filled, with color as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to treat ours, that you first examine and inquire about the entire instrument called "entromissor", according to its form or chapter which follows this one.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the manner of inquiring about abscesses in ours is that you pinch or make it more moist than what you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers gradually until you know that the warmth has spread to the skin; then extract the intruder, taking care so it does not break.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs in the vein, observe its color as I have said of other abscesses; and if after incision there is no moisture, know that it is fatty, then treat it with cross cuts, taking hold at the edges, and lightly scraping from each side while protecting the cloth where it lies, ensuring you cleanse it healthily using this knot; and if you cannot make it clean in one go, then slice it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains after it, the wound returns many times; and if it lingers a while without causing pain, apply certain corrosive powders to the wound, tighten the wound, and place soothing substances on the area until it is healthy again; and if they are large, open the two edges of the wound, treat the underlying cause that causes it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If it is the opposite or another condition and you hasten to use a poultice of vitriol broth, leave it for two or three days until the wound heals, then let the blood evaporate; afterwards return to the remedy that was previously applied.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 See here the forms of intrusion estroments, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among these there are three areas called "albaret," and one called "breb," and among these there are three sizes: large, medium, and small, to search for abscesses in fistulas; and they resemble the needles used by sorcerers, and they are made of citrinite, iron, or silver, with yellow ones being more effective, and those tinted black work better for treating fistula tracts; and there are three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the canal openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of tumors are mostly similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and tumors that have two types of fistula tracts in three ways similarly; and tumors that have three types of fistula tracts, and come in three ways; and tumors that have two types of fistula tracts, or just one type only, and they also come in three ways; all of these are necessary at their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The sharpness of these tools affects only one side, scraping the nerves and not cutting through the vein; and the intrusive ones are reinserted in lashes so that patients do not feel them during abscess opening; there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you see; they are never used except on fleshy parts such as legs, arms, nipples, elbangs, and similar areas; no other small instrument like scraping of warts is ever made according to this method to extract blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And place it once again with certainty to its natural position by connecting veins, and arteries, and then they return according to this great method.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Never inflame the nipples of men when they begin to become corrupted, until they resemble female breasts; and remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be according to this line's method up to point G.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape the fatty tissue and dress the wound with medicinal grease, then sew the two edges of the wound together, and treat until it is healed; if the flesh hangs downward, and is softened by its size, as often happens in women, create two cuts above, through similar fissures; so that one end is held to the other at the ends of both, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form up to the line gb.; then scrape the leather between the two edges and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders for dressing, and everything necessary in treatment until it is healed; if it is not healed or the incision is not properly made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then fill the wound with cotton swab soaked in corrosive ointure; leave it until the remnant and fat are reabsorbed, then treat until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses to elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise below the joints are hard scrofulous swellings and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b. up to line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the li mordoir les jussoie de les moient li plue biete la tues sois parolez venu en lignes ointes, et yte ou ses c. ici dores, et puis est a qui sont l’oeuvre nul le ligne s comme le ce est pine malaise li de tout les mesme pas l’est, si les mele lues biau la est une.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of a similar nature to warts, treat them as we have said for openings in warts, and if the wound begins to bleed, then apply the fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	From cutting into the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is inflamed and the skin above it swells, there are many occurrences of abscesses, which also occur with bleeding and pus; and if you touch it while aiming for the artery, the abscess becomes deep; when you sense it on your thumbs, you feel intense strain; and when it is with veins, they appear deficient; and it's foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is above joints and ankles or by a bone or at many other places, which are large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary then to remove the iron bandage, and for those at the forehead it must also be removed, and in the case of artery bulging above the long skin; next work on the spine with hooks, and gently extract the artery from its sheath until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath, and cut the vessel through to the other side, enscuinting the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in temples; then loosen the leverage which is between the two links of an intramuscular until blood flows from it and stops, and release the abscess; then prepare the wound for suturing until the edges come together; then apply dressing as appropriate for healing; and if the abscesses are near the vein's pathway, one should press down on the entire skin of the abscess with their hand as much as they can see from it, then insert a needle underneath that part held in your hand, cut the vessel through to the other side, so that you draw out the vessel thread between two points; then close the abscess just as I have told you before or sew up one side of the threads in each eye hole; and if there is doubt whether the threads are not tight enough, insert another needle at all the filament's position from below the first incision for the initial needle, and thread the ends together into four holes; then close the abscess until no excess blood flows out, then clip off the excess flesh and leave what has been tied up; then apply a moist swatch of cloth soaked in wine and oil, and dress with tents and ointments until healed.
des apostemes des ners	For abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins when injured or from too much labor, so do they occur in nerves for similar reasons.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This frequently occurs in shoulders and elbebs where there are joints, and it is one of the most painful abscesses, its color resembles that of the body's flesh, and they have various conditions causing pain; when forcefully straightened, patients feel severe pain, not throughout the whole body but from the hairline downward, and moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, upward nor downward, those with joint issues should not be bound with iron as there may be contractions; those who are at the head or forehead form a cuirass on the scalp.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscesses are small, use tweezers and bind them at their root; if they are large, suspend it with an elastic bandage, strip off, then bone up and sew the wound closed, and treat until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Large hanging heads
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Never happens elsewhere but in the stomach; it is an illness called "fungus" due to its appearance, and has subtle roots, and a large base; there are small ones and very large ones; I saw men who had two or three tumors that were more similar to fungi than anything else, with no difference, white in color, fine rooted, split openings, carrying moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I collected them and found one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six, with treatments involving incision to check if the patient is moist, and the color of the articular part being white and moist with fine roots; broaden it for cauterization using heat.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Many times during shaving there are great blood losses, and if it doesn't stop, then quickly apply a cauterizer; and if you see the patient hopeful yet fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made linen thread, and tie off the artery as we have said, leaving it for three days; then tighten, and continue to strain through the linen thread until it stops the bleeding, causing him no further work; and if the roots are thick, be wary of cauterizing his navel by the belly, but cover a large portion well, then cauterize so that it doesn't reopen; then treat the wound, ensuring you do not cauterize the tuft which is of sickly color and poor sensation and white appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an incision for syphilis, and I will come to treat the chancre hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth is filled with fury
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of a swelling comes from a wound or cleft of leprosy, and is located on the abdomen and in some places are nodules, as it occurs in other countries, or blood from veins or arteries depending on what precedes, or inflammation; and if it's due to the disease of syphilis and its discharge, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body, and it's a minor thing without pain, open through various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an issue with the intestine, then there are various things; and when one presses it on its sides so that it pops back, and then returns, and sometimes it may be swollen, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and from hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's from moisture, it is a minor thing and opens well when pressed with your hand, do not constrain; and if it's from blood, then the abscesses are large and hard according to quantity, and visible signs; and if it's from inflammaturbidation, it is sensitive to touch, and treatments should be done carefully while checking if the appearance suggests it comes from an artery or vein.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to allow healing.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there may be doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is in the intestines or bowels, it is necessary to instruct the patient to soak his ligament, and extend it straight, then securely tie everything around the bag; then place the half of the abscess inside the area you have marked with a full thread, and extend the majority of the abscess over all its length; then wrap the ligament tightly with a strong filament or cord made from sturdy silk. Continue working on the extended part of the abscess located above the ligature, applying your chosen medicinal herb, and treat the intestines; if you find them entangled in the ligature, release it and apply the intestines to the belly's underside; and if you find a swelling, remove its excess; and if the artery or vein is acting against you, carefully open it up again, then return to your treatment area and take two needles, placing them in their respective threads, and insert those into the cross that you previously pierced. Straighten the abscess using these four points, and once done, remove the needles and allow the wound to heal on its own; or cut away any dried and foul-smelling matter, then treat according to what is required, and handle the abscues as we have described; extract any blood or moisture found, then treat the area accordingly based on what is needed, and sew it closed.
dou chancre	Of a carbuncle
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	In our division of the resemblances of ulcers, and how one must treat them with medicines, and how to cleanse the wound of iron; and we shall speak of carbuncles that arise in muscles, requiring great caution for treatment, and ancient physicians say that when carbuncles are present or can be removed as those which are located on the thighs, buttocks, and similar areas, they should all be completely removed at their beginning; and when they become large and old, it is not advisebre to approach them, for I have never seen one healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatments that are present or can be removed as we have said, is to purge the patient of black bile once; then make him lean for treatment if he shows signs of repletion, and prepare the patient a good place to perform the operation; then apply ointments or ulcers, and scrape off all hairs and fat from all parts without leaving anything; let blood flow freely, squeeze it well into your hand or any object, and if the bleeding changes direction from the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is closed; then treat with another remedy until healed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have already mentioned in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and those which are treated with iron; they only differ. And one should not touch with iron on these two similarities: namely, tympanites and hyposarcoma, for it's a lethal condition; therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "swelling" by medicines, and the treatment does not help, check if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsamoetry; as all and abdominal distension and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there's doubt; and if you see a strong patient with only dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then so should you act: lift the patient upright in your hands, and the assistants press the abdomen, pushing the water to the lowest part of the belly, then take the spatula bone according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And take sharp knives of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And take sharp knives of two parts. One pointed and the other not too thin so that it can be inserted up to the intestine without cutting; then check if dropsy has begun toward the intestines: if necessary, make an incision above the buttock III directly from behind; and if dropse is due to a liver disease, make the incision on the left of the buttock III; and if it's hemorrhoids, do so on the right, ensuring that excesses do not flow too much to weaken the patient at that location; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, remove a quantity equivalent to a nail or slightly less from under the surface as in scraping; then pierce the fascia until reaching eight fingerbreadths, which is where the water lies, and then proceed along it, placing this instrument of the described shape.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is similar to a silverfish subtle and light as an eel or a sturgeon, and in the part below the small hole; when it approaches from one side, there are three holes; two on another side, and one on each other. The head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top is the artery, and when blood flow approaches, it rises with the instrument; then empty either a third or half of it, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, by chance you may kill the patient through the dissipation of his spirit from the weapon, causing him to faint palms or approach death. However, empty according to the quantity due to his virtue and according to what the disposition of the virtue of the sick man signifies, and his hairs; then handle the instrument and retain the water, which is retained now through the hole that stops the artery above the sac, as I have spoken about, piercing in this manner; then resume the instrument the following day if you see the patient suffering from it, and extract a small quantity of blood. Do this every day but do not overdo it with bleeding until it is completely done.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 If you doubt the patient's condition and provide him with plenty of water, then treat by burial or hot sand, through much sweating or bathing and in sunlight; and use dry medicines until he is healthy again, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after draining the excess fluid, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the erectile dysfunction
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There is never a child born with no spur in the penis, or if the spur exists but it's small, or not located properly.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If there is often an urgent need for him to be circumcised in all directions quite delicately according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then apply the thin spur of glue and bind it securely for 3 or 4 days until he is able to urinate; then release him from the bandage as needed because if his urination flows freely, there's no need for further closure.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 Those whose eyelids are drooping shall receive medication to the base of the nose as we have said, and it will swell up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have eyelids in their proper place are blinded because none arise with the eyelids at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis upward; and cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach to the testicles, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, and the head of the penis and scrotum are lifted up to the size of a pen'ill, so that the foreskin retracts as needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it does occur, then use the stitching thread to close the wound until healed.
des pustules de la verge	From pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the penis, and it appears as an ugly blemish; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; thus, you should puncture them with a fine needle, drain all pus, then place cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment on top, and cure the wound with this ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and draining, it is necessary that you treat with a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have coped it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, both inside the skin and outside, it is necessary to remove the ulcer that is within first; and when it hardens, treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you treat it together, do not ensure the head of the penis is pierced; darkness and decay come to the penis and its sheath; therefore, address all that is dark and corrupted before placing a poultice made from green plum bark and dates, then continue with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, prepare the moon cautery in this manner:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cauterization serves two purposes together: bleeding and decay, and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then insert or conduct cotton in the penis to induce urination; and when hairs are found near the top of the penis in those who have not been circumcised due to injury or abscess, it must be scraped with a sharp instrument until all edges are freed and the head of the peneus dealt with from every aspect. If this is a serious matter, then gently cauterize near the top of the penis and hairs using a paste made with cold fresh water; then carefully separate them and apply a fine linen cloth soaked in chilled clean water without overdoing it.
de la circoncision	It pertains to circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a discontinuation of wounds like the others; however, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greater part of masters and saints who practiced circumcision in one day, and with force, and all newborn; it was there keys because there are two locks, and perhaps a cupboard is hung over one and another stays underne.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	When it is recaptured, the pain doubles, and in the softening which is not far from death, the point of the limb is not assured; and sometimes during the softening of the nail, the iron escapes, causing harm to the vessel, and many times this occurs so that there is no need for further treatment.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In the softening which is done with force on all parts of the sinew, I have found the effectiveness of the experiment, as the forces cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, make them equal in all the tension; but ensure the thread is well tightened around it; and keep the manner of the first operation such that you make the child think, if they perceive it, that you are only wrapping the thread around the rod just enough, and then allow him to sigh in every way possible; then let him stand upright between your hands, with his forces hidden from view underfoot or not visible at all. Then place your hand on the rod and blow or wipe, raising it as high as the head of the rod allows, cleaning it well of any dirt gathered therein, securing its knot with a double thread, then tying it below each knot; and use two strings for the pouchet and index finger, and tie them together, then release slowly without haste, as blood flows out slightly, indicating maturity. Then sprinkle powder on it and coat it thickly with glue made from a quarter of an egg well beaten with rose water mixed with oil, rich and fresh; let it stay there until the following day, treating it further until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of cleansing is this: both sides should be held and sharpened, and the edges should be as large as a hazel rod equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mummification is when the core inside flees to the incision; therefore, it must be stretched with your fingernail, so that the core makes an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they transgress for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, leave it until the abscess has subsided, and lightly scorch; cut as you may move, and protect the part of the rod, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the sudden wound of powder, as we have said or written about powders, and if you cut beyond measure, and it goes to the top, it will not harm; treat accordingly, as we have said, until it is sound again.
dou retenement de l’urine	Holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The holding back of urine is from a stone in the bladder, frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not flow and you see there is retention due to a stone that is either in the bladder neck or urethra, it should be done by lying on its knees. The patient's feet are placed on their back, stretching out their stomach from above the back; they hold themselves steady as much as possible. Then one constrains the neck of the bladamo urine is released and if it does not come forth, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide relief with a procedure using an instrument called "catheter," which consists of: fine silver wire bent like a bird's feather; the tube should be one palm wide and half again as long.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The method for releasing the urine is to take a double thread and tie it at the end with some wool or cotton, then insert the head of the thread into the siphon; trim off excess wool until you reach the top of the siphon, then grease the siphon with oil or butter and frankincense resin. Make the patient sit on a stool, apply oil to their bladder and penis, using moist olive oil and water at room temperature; then gently insert the siphon into the penis until it reaches near the base of the penis, then twist the penis towards the backside. Insert the siphon up to the bladamoontly, so that the patient feels relief, without following this order because the path you follow may be crooked; once all wool is removed, urine will follow the thread which can be extracted and discarded. Repeat filling the siphon until the bladder is emptied, ensuring the patient's comfort.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or rottenness is present, and you see that you must distill waters and medicines, make use of all the instrument called "clampsyr": it has this form.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and if there are three openings: two from one side and one from the other, as you see; the upper hole through which the medicinal cord is inserted so that it hangs freely without hindrance to urination, and can be pulled out when necessary, and placed where needed; and when you observe your medicine in the bladder, place the head of the catheter into the moisture, and pull up at the junction point which is there; from the catheter you will draw out the moisture to the bag, then firmly reinsert the junction point; thus the moisture will enter it now, so that the patient feels it; this is the subtle form of clistere which cleanses the bladder: such is this.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 It is of silver or iron, and the head is higher; from underneath at his neck the ligaments break; then take a sheep bladder and put in it the moisture that you want to administer as an enema using the bladero; then tie the two nipples with a good double thread, and heat slightly the moisture over fire; then pour into the rod the enema, then strain your hand around the bladder until the patient feels the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle with it, and pierce roundly through; then put a strong thread into these holes, then join the circle as one would assemble a saddle, and put inside what you want of oil, moisture, and water, and tie in the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have previously discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction and accompanying medicines; and we described the difference between stones caused by rain, and all other signs, and where one must work to cut into a stone; and regarding the bladder, and the penis; and I will now tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones formed in the bladebody are more common in children and this is a sign that water leaks from the bladder like a stream of fine water; and there is often blood in urine, and men suffer with their penises, and they experience many spasms; and from such leakage, their foundations weaken; and it's easier for children to heal until they are four years old, but severe in the elderly, and moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 When we come to treat them, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema, to cleanse all feces from within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it never hinders one in attempting to extract the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up straight, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladastery, and comes out without difficulty from below; then make him sit between your hands well-supported, with his hands above his thighs, ensuring that the bladastery is completely tilted downward; then grasp and probe inside. If you feel the stone in place, proceed immediately to cut around it.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not come out easily through probing, grease your index finger with oil from the left hand, and insert into the throat of the patient, or into their navel if they are a child, or into the middle for adults; then push firmly at its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, widen the bladastery's neck; then press with your finger there, and extract downward wherever you see fit.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and tell him to extend with his right hand the joints upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the joint where the cutting occurs; then he inserts the cauterizing spatula, which gives it its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And there is between those who are between the joints and the foundation, neither at the middle but on the left side of the neck; and it's right above the stone, and your hands should be adjacent or foundational, and support them across so that they are wide apart by necessity, and inwardly narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps press so that the hand that is between or foundational jumps without effort; and know that there may be a piece of stone or it has angles and borders: if they are grainy to remove; and if part that is loose, like wood shavings, and round, where its removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 If there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must use tweezebarbs that resemble a file at the top, in order to extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or place the delicate instrument curved at the top underneath it; and if you cannot manage thusly, enlarge slightly the opening a bit more until the urine flows, then strain with vitriol; and if there are more stones, first extract the largest from the bladder neck, then pull upwards, then remove deeply, and address any smaller ones afterward.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, then it must be cut away, causing a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For two things happen to the patient: they die or their urine remains in place because the bladder cannot be sewn shut; however, you must exert effort with hemostasis and debridement using tweezers until it is cleansed piece by piece; once your work is completed, apply an ointment of incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound along with a bandage. Then cover the patient on their neck and do not remove the stitches until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the joint rises quite well into place with oil and water, then heal with diaphinic unguent and basilic unguent until it is healthy again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if abscesses and ulcers come into the wound along with congealing of blood in the bladaderelief urine retention, which is known to be a kind of pain when voiding without leakage: so treat this area in the wound, and extract the sanguinenearly the bladder; otherwise it will rot and swell. Then wash the wound with water, oil, and salt until healed; you should assist him however possible until well-rested. It is essential that all bandages used to treat are fastened around his thighs, and apply medicines at the site of injury.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the stone is small and it is led from the groin and inserted thusly, and urine cannot pass; if you treat as I have described here, you must dilate multiple times with this method of relieving through dilation.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced such a thing.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron stake according to this form and make it at three pointed ends in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a wire and wrap it around the groin above the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladebag; then insert the borer gently into the groin until reaching the stone; turn the borer back and forth slowly, as long as you can pierce through the other side of the stone; urine will come out soon after, then press your hand on what remains inside the groin from the stone.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is so quickly torn and jumps out with urine, the patient recovers; if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, then lay the fil on top of the stone and another above, then make the rod press down at the place between the two ligaments, then extract forcefully, release the ligaments, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and heal it until it is healthy again.
de la piere des femmes	From women's wounds
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that the wound is inflicted in women, and if it occurs once, then it is a serious treatment; there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and the second reason is that we cannot find a skilled female who can undress before mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third way is that sometimes one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of a woman is more deeply embedded than that of a man, so it requires a deeper incision with great fear involved. And if necessary to attempt this, you must hire a midwife who knows well, pay her little, and if you do not find one, seek out any skilled female healer; and present them a competent woman knowledgeable in the lives of women or a woman who knows part of the art, commanding that she perform what you instruct regarding the exploration of the stone; and make sure the woman is a virgin. Then it must be done properly or firmly, seek out the stone with her hand fully stretched, and press deeply into the bladder area. And if she finds it, constrain it from below and advise that she places her hand either on top of the wound or against it, while pressing forward with her left hand over the bladader
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is out of joint, you must move it gradually from the edge of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut at the stone in the thigh near the middle of the hip where it appears misshapen, and feels like a stone in that part; do not twist its knee above or below the stone, but instead grip firmly. Then push with your hand into the opening; if you feel the stone as far as possible so that the stone can come out, understand that there are many types of stones: they can be small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, some have veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you feel similar symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 If the pain persists, then apply warm vinegar compresses and hold for an hour until it numbs; then return to your task as long as the stone is still firm, and use the measures I have described in removing a stone from the bladder to help you with your work; if the pain continues, and it is arterial compression, apply powder at the site and compress with bandages and tapes, do not attempt this again, leave the stone alone unless the patient dies, then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling subsides, return to your procedure until the wound is healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of inguinal hernia, a fleshly swelling.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Assembling of water is nothing but moisture or white scum, which is below the root of the veins, contained in the urethra; and it is called "syphilis," and not once properly within the lining of the urethra when one thinks it may be another object; and it is the leather of the vessel between the white syphilis that we have mentioned; and they do not occur without cause.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the origin of this scum is weakness in the vessels, and it spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And never if it comes from the spleen and this discoloration has many shades: or it is turning to jaundice, or lacks redness, or blackness, or watery whiteness, and this often happens; these are signs of recognizing this condition, for if it is as we have described white facies, then it is true abscesses reins, they are not long like an egg's shape, and do not open the spleen because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 If there is moisture in the proper cloth, it indicates an abscess with part of the fatty tissue, and for this reason one thinks it's another type; if the moisture is between the skin layers and the white fascia, then one feels well overall; therefore, when you see to determine the color of the moisture, touch all around thoroughly, which indicates its previous shape.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intermission, judge by what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When treating by fire, it is necessary to keep the patient well-fed as much as possible and maintain body volume; then have him lie on his back, elevated slightly, with plenty of linens; then he lies on his left side, and instructs the assistant that they lie on their right, extending the rod towards one of the two ribs near where the skin layers are long down to the wrist, then take a spatula lightly, gently separate the skin layer along its length until nearing the wrist, making a straight incision parallel to the skin layers up to white fascia; after that, delicately scrape off the fatty tissue clean of water with a wide slit and extract all the fluid, then apply dressings and elevate the affected area. Do not touch the ribs, but only the fatty layer; remove it entirely or in pieces gently without using force if you do not cut well sharply, as it will cause fluid to return. If the fatty tissue burst again during your operation, have him lie on his side when you have completed the work with the fatty tangle; then unite the two ribs near where skin layers are by suturing and treat them like other wounds until healing is complete.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the vein affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie up the vessels that are dilated, suspecting blood discharge; then cut the vein throughout its entirety, and extract the vein, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 When the fracture is joined in two parts together, know that these are two branches; treat the other part as you did the first equally, then stop the bleeding, and apply greasy linen to the wound; also place another greasy linen soaked in wine and oil over it, and put on the two bandages, and a doubled cloth, and let the line remain above all according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two cloths and employ rag stuff in this manner and assemble them by sewing at the girth of the trousers, with one side covering up to the back, and the other part towards the lower elbow; and the other two heads over the inner arms, and be all gathered into a loop within the apron's fold. This cauterization remedy is not like this iron-tailed instrument, but use you shall the sharp knife of cautery as we have described, cut the leather of the sheaths, and they should be soaked if possible; so that when the white matter containing water is uncovered, then take the cautery according to this form: puncture those veins with it, and scrape using this hot knife.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 In all the methods of wrapping you know how to do it until complete; and ensure that the fire does not touch the skin; and understand that this work is more healing; and keep yourself from blood flow issues, and treat those resulting from cutting; and if anything opposes you or causes an abscess or blood flow problems or something else, then address what causes opposition, as previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 If the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this treatment due to its severity, then proceed as instructed: if you are well aware of what we have said about how one should perform the irrigation when ready, make a perforation in the place where it seems appropriate; sit the patient on an elevated seat with their legs upwards, and puncture the abscess at the part below all the tissue area wide open, placing the perforation long enough to reach deep into the body. Make sure that the holes are large so that water flows freely through them; then place cotton over it, tie it off, and allow for any remaining fluid to drain out; treat until the wound is healed; if swelling does not let fluid escape from the opening of the wound, you need to insert a pen or an instrument used for treating effusions as described above. Expand the size of the wound and understand that fluid returns, gathering after about six months or so, and when it has gathered like before, this will allow the patient's days to pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	For abscesses of pus
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In this part of the treatise on disease, there are various conditions causing fear in some, so it seems best to leave them be; and I will tell you about the workings and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	And at this matter much oft in order to apply and is herein it comes li pois ence; of the blood and pains that of aillements are often applied on wrye healing, sme semble le pouvre et les meurres pour la mourde que and the plustarments.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is known by its excessive sourness and ague, spreading to the joints or through percussion; and the color of an abscess corresponds with the body's overall color; there is no pain, but it is a severe abscess; and sometimes it may be gangrenous, pus-filled, and discolored, never coming from our arteries or vein inflammebles.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it comes from our arteries, you can recognize by the hotness of an abscess when pressing with your thumbs; and one must not even touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 The one who is made swollen of veins can be recognized by his tendency to express pain when touched on the joints; and he may well make an incision in this manner, and in other growths; then clip off the head of the gland, let it hang upwards, and draw out through the white foreskin, releasing the suspensory ligament from all parts of the gland.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the gland is already sufficiently severed by these growths, then it is necessary to draw out the gland and clip off; and if there is hardness in the foreskin or within the vessels, it is necessary to release all that tissue, and cut roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of a hernia is where it is located behind, one must cut it all out and remove the intestine, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are completed, apply the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	For abscesses of pus
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping resembling a burr, with the softening of the tissues, and it moves quickly when approached; and the treatment for this disease is as alarming as the one previously mentioned, so we shall advise on its care according to what was done by the ancients.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the seat elevated, then tie the suspenders to your legs, encompassing all the garments close to the groin, and the master's thighs, and stretch them out fully; then bandage with a sharp strap broadly across the area where the vessels are visible, until they are covered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are within temples; then insert a needle or thread doubled, and tie it at the first spot where blood is seen, and firmly to the opposite end; then bind straight through the middle according to the length of the body, and puncture any corrupted moisture points; then treat the wound as with other bowed instruments, so that no vessel bursts causing swelling in either thigh; for by this method there is no harm, and wherever blood comes to all vessels, it is necessary to drain both thighs; lest the bones lose their nourishment due to the puncturing of vessels, and become dry and unable to aid.
de la routure dou syfac	On the treatment of wounds on the skin
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The effects of this remedy are by incision which results from vomiting or extension over the stomach in the hind part area causing intestines to descend on either side; and this descent is due to vomiting, or stretching, or sneezing, or lifting a heavy burden, and through similar causes: whether from impact, jump, shout, or sudden movement of grave weight, and so forth; and the signs when it's extension by vomiting are that it occurs gradually and over time, not suddenly; and abscesses are equally distributed towards the front because the stretching accelerates the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of cutting the sack, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse boils appear from under the skin, due to the exit of the intestines and the body's response to the sack.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time do the windings with the intestines occur and are retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron by fear, it is necessary to flee from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The method of treatment is that you command the patient to open their intestines with his hand into the wound, if they can enter it; then slightly stretch over its neck between your hands, and lift up thighs; then extend the head on top, and cut all the skin off from the length around; then insert fingers of the belly according to what you need to open the wound, and those that let the guts come out. Then scrape off the outer fat above the skin of the buttocks as long as the white fat is completely exposed on all sides; then stick your index finger into it where the buttock is between the inner fat, and between the second fat, and separate what is behind the fat, and between the second fat. Then pull up with your right hand from under the head of the buttocks, and lift the white fat to your left hand towards the belly; then command the assistant that he stretches out the fat over its top part, and separates it which lies beyond the connection; and tie them if you find intestine or hard fats around. And if there is anything else, push it into the abdamenum. Then take a needle or where you have X threads made of thread, and insert in the back part after the junction. After the belly, then cut off those that appear from these threads until there are IV threads; then assemble them one above the other like a cross, and tie down the fat which is behind the skin of the buttocks with a strong string on both sides; then wrap around the thread ends, and also keep it tied so no suture can enter inside, where pus does not come. Finally put the first rope according to its length along two fingers from that same hand, and after these II strings tie down the fat which is behind the head of buttocks as large as one finger; and then with the other string follow according to the roundness that it carries; then cut on the part underne. The skin below and around. Then prepare wool in oil, and apply into wounds, and also tie down the strings like we have said before.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And do not cauterize white feces that we have mentioned, after the incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens, leaving the wound to heal on its own; and if it starts to close slowly, soak with warm water as we have mentioned, until it heals; then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healthy again.
de hernie carnouse	Of inguinal hernia, a fleshly swelling.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made as a ramus which joins with the joint, in such a way that you bind the vessels after making an incision lightly below the bone; then cover it up and treat the abscess of what works underneath until the vessels heal; and cure it as we have said, until it is completely healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 It never comes to ruptures in this area as we have said and opening the mouths; and none of the intestines protrude from the joints, and if they do so, it's little, and everything heals within hours; still, if it lingers too long at that point, a plaque or hernia forms until the intestine protrudes; this happens due to the extension of a soft hernia found in the joints as we have said because they are extended, then the mouths become more tender and swolebeefy; and it is cured with fire caustic as we have previously mentioned: and no time is spent curing by iron in this manner: that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then cut a piece of skin from the extended area according to the quantity of three stitches; and then extract the hernia which is underneath the skin that covers it, then take the thread and place it over the skin near the hernia; and press firmly at the center of the abdomen, then cut the two holes near the top of the head where the thread lies, and cut both; then extract the lump from above the thread, and do not cover up or extend any ulcer or other thing as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal hernias; then it is cured by wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bind up the wounds, if they become inflamed and treat the injury, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sack is constricted, and it has no appearance in the healing process, and the cautery is more effective at this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the joints is softened in certain individuals because the tissues within are moistened, and the sweat is visible; when one wants to treat it, they make the patient lie on their back, and cut the overgrown skin above the natural skin; then join the two edges with a single stitch, and if you see any excess softened skin, do so at three or four firmly placed stitches; next sew between the stitches like other wounds until it is healthy again, and let it heal.
dou chastrement	From hardening of the tissues around the joints
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 It is known that castration is permitted by our law, and I would not wish to speak of it in this book; but necessary for two reasons: one being that the master will answer when asked about it and its cure; and the other because we often need the castration of certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, hawks, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the one we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and swollen; then grasp it with your hand, until they return to normal and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Regarding the treatment of cutting: it is necessary to grasp the animal, and press the hide between your left hand's leather pads, then tie the suspensorium, and patch each joint with a piece of cloth after you have properly scraped them; leaving no spot untouched for feces or subtle feces found among the limbs; this method of cutting is more effective than that made by attraction, because in the latter there may be nothing between the leather pads causing the animal to crave lust. Then treat the wound until it heals completely.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphroditism is a condition involving both male and female reproductive organs.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphrodite is in two ways among men: one where between the two gonads it appears as if of female nature, with hair, and occasionally excretes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is for women, and it occurs at their wrists as well as at their thighs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for men and women is that you drain all swollen chaffeurs (testicles), and treat them as with other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine spurts from the skin of their thighs, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of displacement
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Hydrocele is a swoln testicle on the natural part, so much that it's too ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that's the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary that you grasp the excess of hydrocele with your hand or fingernails and press lightly; do not go in too deeply to prevent bleeding, then treat it with other remedies until healed; and for another testicle that appears at the mouth of the scrotum, which protrudes out, sometimes spurting forcefully, and is similar to a cow's udder, hence they called the ancient "disease kowe".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary, do as we have instructed with testing, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratic is the movement of an object or individual that does not follow a fixed or regular course; often unpredictable in behavior or direction.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of a woman is not fully perceived, or if her womb is small; it is innate by birth, or due to an illness that has come upon them; or it occurs from frigidity, or subtle syphilis or dampness, and it forms completely in the uterus, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be located; and it hinders conception, pregnancy, and possibly bearing children; and knowledge of this is determined by examining her vagina.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the hemorrhage appears suddenly, sometimes in both legs or in the groin.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is very thin, and the sack is near the kidneys, proceed quickly: join together two index fingers, have the woman lie on her back with legs apart; then extend both elbows fully until the subtle sack ruptures, and press over the leaks; then take wool, soak in oil, place it on the area, and apply a poultice each day, to prevent re-closure.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 If the sac is hard and thick, it must be skinned like a turnip: cut around its shape with resembling fern leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the leakage is of pus, bind it with a string and skin it; also prepare cleansing medicines such as crushed dragon's blood, incense, in abundance with egg yolnk; then apply an ointment made from plantain leaves wide, so that the wound cannot close; and thus be treated over time until healed; and afterwards, treat with other remedies until fully cured.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a hare comes with its young, it must be covered according to this manner, unless there are swelling abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For the growing abscess in the joints, one should not touch with fire.
des emorroides	For hemorrhoids: One should apply creams or ointments containing ingredients like witch hazel and hydrocortisone to reduce inflamm<|im_sep|>Here is the translation of the text:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Efforts are veins that have not become accustomed to use; and when efforts grow old, they turn red; and we have discussed in the section about their types, signs, and symptoms, and I will now say which ones respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that efforts and redness when they are partially in the joints, do not appear to touch; only the one treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the opening of the joint can be felt and those that can be healed.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 It is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the tongue with tweezebts, and wrap it at its roots, then powdered medicines restricting blood, as customary and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour her feet into hot water for an hour, then place her in cold water. And if bleeding resumes, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranates and haws and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and knead with honey and onion, and make a poultice to place upon her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it is ingrown, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, apply cups to the back and on the thighs without causing harm; then take linen, and milk with nettle or aglet juice mixed with wine, and apply at the site.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when an abscess has healed, treat the area with ointment until it is clean; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough surface like I have described earlier; then care for it until it is also clean.
des apostemes de la marris	Marrubias abscesses
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscesses arise in the groin: like cancer and deep abscesses, herpes, itching, suppurations, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 It is therefore necessary that in this treatise I explain the hot abscess which arises on the bone, which is not merely an abscess that collects pus; and if you know how to observe with iron, look whether the abscess is hard at its beginning of appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red as you can see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not rush to puncture it but let the patient rest until the pain is eased; then have them sit on a chair with two small pillows for support while leaning back and joining their limbs from the part of the leg that lacks strength; let their thighs be spread apart, place their arms under their hips, and securely tie them with good linen; then move the handle towards the right side ribcage, and prepare the instrument used for working in the mouth of the bone, from which follows its shape; it is necessary that when you see using this instrument, insert a probe to determine the depth of the bebone, so that what enters through the instrument does not go further than it should, nor hurt the patient; and if the fistulae are large, then cover the depth of the bone with dressings, so that the fistulae do not irritate them. And place the cone-shaped part of the instrument atop, and immerse the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess is opened and it's touched with bare hands, if necessary cover with gauze on the head, tied loosely; and when the bowels are emptied, one should place moistened bandages in oil of roses or dry green olive oil in the wound; put a strong bandage over the wound at the edge of the kidney, and wrap clean, moistened linen around it or near the bone until well cooked; then treat after two days with healing salve until healthy again; occasionally lift the kidney and wound using an enema of water and honey, and then water or long roots of lily and aristolochia steeped in liquid; resume applying ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed on the bone, it is necessary to avoid cooking with iron, but treat as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	During childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 Firstly, it is necessary for the midwife to know the natural figure of childbirth and recognize its signs when a woman feels an urge to push and desires to smell feces: then quickly proceeds with the birth of the baby; this indicates that such childbirth follows the natural figure, with the head coming first followed by the rest of the body. And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on the belly so that the baby emerges soon; for as the head exits, the rest follows with him, and the fecal matter in its superfluities is cleansed naturally; those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 At times it comes upon his feet, and arrives at the body or head, and hands, when it comes onto his belly or back, and is turned over by chance around his neck, and in other mischievous shapes; it's necessary for the healer to be keen and subtle in these matters, to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as how one should assist him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes naturally with its head and the mother gives birth gratefully, and the strength of her is weak, then she should sit on a stool or women hold her; and let the natural ointment of oil or fenugreek be cooked and then apply it to the midwife between his two fingers: this is how you shape (the poultice).
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And pierces the secondina, and cleans his ungues as long as the moisture that is within it flows; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if not, then enemas should be given to the woman with muscatel wine and fenugreek oil mixture; then have her lie down for an hour: now deliver the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 If the two hands slip out, you must gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, lifting her feet upwards; then lift the chair off the ground, and support the woman so she does not fall while standing; and if the hands cannot be reinserted, and the child dies, wrap the hands in a cloth placed there beforehand, extract the child, and reset evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 From the exit of the child through its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out through its feet, you must push upwards slightly; then slowly turn it until it is even; then grasp the legs and extend them gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it reaches up to the thighs, then command to press, and make it sneeze due to condition; if it jumps again, so be it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not fall as we have said, if turned slightly and slightly, until according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come up as we have done, then take muscatel wine, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and pound all together in a mortar; and put this ointment on the affected area, then make her sit in cold water until she reaches her waistline; and when it is softened below, apply the collyrium from mirra, and place it there, leaving it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and hold her mouth and nose, gently pressing her belly as the baby will now jump.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the dislocation of the child's knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, the barber gently touches his hands little by little; then lie him on his back, and let the feet hang downward, and they lay him beside the bed; and fold his hands little by little, and then press the hands against his belly, and lift the pillows off from below until it is aligned downward; and if the child does not cry out, you take his feet and move them normally, then move his belly upwards, then put your hands on him; and soothe the child little by little; and command the woman to breastfeed as long as the child suckles.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	that le plus et la dur:
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 One must engineer to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, raise the woman and go; if she cannot walk, lay her on a bed with legs bent properly; then arrange the muscularity as I described; and if she does not give birth, seat her on a chair, then examine how to restore the hand; and do this according to natural form, cause her to hiccup, and command that she breastfeeds as long as the child suckles.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the child's neck, and let its hands spread apart, and turn its face towards its mother'cuest.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the barber washes his hand, then turns it little by little and dries it lightly; and when it is even, apply musk extract and oil as we have said, then command that it move a little and a little; and once you have done this, make it sit on a chair, and command that it grimaces; and cause it to sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, give them all a second dose
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes to this method in the second course, grasp the nail while ensuring moisture is dried; and if a child rests on his face and neck, clip the beard so that it's not held back, causing the child to move; then insert the child inside as he should be positioned, and command the woman to grimace in any way: thereafter, do so gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of joints
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that many times multiple gemelz occur, but never four at once; and this is not a strange occurrence, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 There are two things that do not live unless by name; I know this: they multiply and are driven out by the leech who steals them, which is tied to a bull; and at no time do they come forth naturally like all other offspring below, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they emerge abruptly, and the remedy is as we have said, with subtle healers, who quickly and easily perform what needs to be done, thus ensuring their well-being.
de plusors enfans	And many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are never formed in mares I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, nor any beyond up to XV, but they always take the form of children by careful measurement with a glorious tool, and it is necessary that the healer knows all this, for sometimes things similar happen; thus act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of a child dead
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman who has lost her child or is pregnant and there is no miscarriage, as I have described in the division, and she needs surgical intervention; it must be ensured that the woman is of sound health and has not had any accidents or fears of death. It should also be verified if the woman's feet are elevated above her head, and her legs lifted; then you should tie the strap on two parts so she cannot move freely due to being tied to the bed as not to treat her lower abdamen during childbirth. Then rub the mouth of the womb with oily muscillaige made from almond oil, fenugreek and flaxseed; then apply these oils and musk on her hands. Place it gently into the womb and ensure that the baby is not prematurely expelled through its head; insert the cord in one of the mentioned locations and be cautious if childbirth begins above his head, place the cord in his fingers or neck or mouth or upper palate or below the beard or arm pit or near the ribs; it must be that you tie the cord with your right hand and put a pouch between her thumbs of left hand, gently press the cord into one of these locations until delivery is complete; this is how the strap should look.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then make the other incision where necessary, so that extractions are even; and then extend them equally in movement from both sides to allow for movement, and have the edges of the incisions be straight to hold together as is shown.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains stuck, use olive oil to lubricate its edges and insert it into that area, while treating the other side; and if nothing remains, place this incision or further up as needed, and sew until all are fully closed.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought together by gripping, then wrap it with a dressing so that all sutures are done; then close at the joint of the sole or heel, and thus make the same in the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 If the child's head is large and protruding at the exit, or if there is a new wound, you must put the spatulare spine between your fingers, straighten the head, and extract fluid; or place it on the instrument called "almidach," from which form comes with straining or pressure afterwards; thus similarly make the child's head naturally large; then heat up the bones with tongs, and if the head springs forth and is stretched by force, fracture until moisture issues out, so that it can escape. If it cannot come out, divide by cutting as much as you are able to move; and if swolled in the abdomen or below the ribs, pierce until moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the child is under its feet, then the pull is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the worms is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If it is difficult in the belly or udder, you must stretch it with a drape wrapped around by hand; and massage the belly or udder until the moisture inside is removed; and if another limb is inflamed, and the head remains dislocated, then place his hand fully into the marrow cavity and draw to its opening; then insert an onion or leek, and pull through completely; and if the opening of the marrow cavity is blocked by a pus-filled abscess that has formed there, do not strain it but rather apply moist and fatty substances; treat with these things thoroughly saturated in water, soaked in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 If the child is on its back and you can set it straight, follow what we have said about treating live children; if they cannot be moved at all, cut through in sections, leaving nothing of the spine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And once you have done this, if it follows what we have said about abscesses that arise near the bones; and if bleeding occurs, put in an iron clamp to stop it, and perform other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with a child in her womb that had died, then closed up one of the twins and brought out another dead one; this was the other live child.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	s;
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treatment, and for a long time I thought, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	Underneath my strong suction came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I felt very much pain because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	to se a; and lesse ld be on the time, and so as wee de la.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I show the wound and treat the broken bones as much as possible; the patient remained in this state for long periods of time until there was improvement to some degree; then it became slightly better; but I do not remember this treatment being performed, except that when masters encounter foreign things, they should know how to apply them.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the head of the bone to its original position
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of pressure, to which one may refer books; and at two ends there are two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The horn should be more delicately restrained, and made of ivory or boxwood; the mouth of the instrument must be wide, with margins of one palm and a half in length; and between the two joints there are two spans of this same shaft, firmly fixed on each side by half a palm long or slightly more; these two spans are attached to the edges of the marrow for opening when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in its construction made of ebony or boxwood wood according to the appearance of pliers; and it has two spans similar to what you see, one palm wide and a span long; when you see opening the marrow with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on all fours, her hands outstretched and legs exposed, then place both spans together in the marrow, holding the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand across the whole instrument as you did with the pliers equally, according to the quantity you see opening the mouth of the marrow until she compleebts what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all similar but has various appearances; and the more masters you have prepared them, the faster the work will be done, and higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not forget to prepare the instrument which is necessary for its use, as their needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must command the patient to grip her alleyway, then tie her nostrils shut, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose; if she does so, it's all well and good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, take a stick or lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the child, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, any combination of them, should be boiled in water or simmered on fire; then place a cloth or lid over the pot, with one end inside the mouth of the child, allowing vapors to enter the child's mouth; then allow for nasal expulsion as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second rib dislocates, promptly set it right.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it remains after this treatment and is not loose, command the patient to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or musk essence of ambergris, and then insert it into nature, along with a suppository; when found, grip and extend it gradually straight, so that the bones do not break during extraction. However, it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pulled out; this will come back and separate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the root of the bone is stretched out too much, we have advised the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; if it is not from all that we have mentioned, ensure you do not attempt to extract it without care. However, what is at the mouth of the bone must be tied off using a woman's thigh, then clysterized with medicated ointment tetrafarmacist-made; this will cause pain and reset back into place, but regardless, if it discharges so that foul odor comes to the stomach and head, causing the patient great distress.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If necessary, then fragrant smoke baths should be used here: none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with dried sorrel and figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman for retention of locks (pubic hair) is this one:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It is like a can opener in appearance, and place the subtle head on firewood, and wide thighs above flames; and apply smoldering to the embers, and lichen until it is consumed, then begin again with another.
de percier lou fondement	And of piercing the foundations.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Children are born who do not have the proper foundation but rather a subtle tear: thus it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that tear at its rightful place and not of unclean pus, ensuring she does not touch the opening; then applies cloth soaked in wine and oil, followed by ointment treatment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not heal, then apply a bandage with boiled linen and let it remain on for days, and remove when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	the t.
de la fistule dou fondement	Of the fistula from the base foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that arise from the foundation are inflamed and grow near it, or within a space of two parts; if there is one fistula or several, and when this inflammation is ancient, they work hard to produce pus or subtle discharge, and never without these fistulas being present; known by what occurs with them or egestion, or windsiness as the sick person has a bowel movement, and sometimes an episode of vomiting.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if to the fistulas that perforate up to the bladder, and up to the shaft of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and our side of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus you find the persistent fistula at its base and not elsewhere; it is that you insert your index finger or thumb into the base, and insert a fine needle of willow bark or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is twisting, then you insert a small thin tent or horse hair into it until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel anything, and there are no signs of leakage, gas, or wind as we have said: know that it does not puncture.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches up to the bladder or the urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be treated with remedies.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is punctured up to the hip joint, then the tent comes close to its place; if there is no twisting and the pain ceases with incision, then you should bow it back, without any medicine or dressing by ointment; in such persistent fistulas, there are no remedies other than laborious effort, and vanity of foolish people who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In those that are not fearful and not aged, with hope of healing by means of iron as I have tried, the patient lies between your hands on their back; you lift their legs up to their thighs, keeping their thighs inclined towards their belly; then place a tent [of linen] or bandage if there is any curvature, until you know where it goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels entanglement at the base, it is appropriate to place your index finger there if you sense any obstruction; and when you feel between your finger the sphygm or artery, then you know it is fearful; do not try unless it can be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 At any time one can properly heal some things well, but it happens rarely; and the thing to do when doing so is to use a subtle fire cautery according to the size of the fistula as previously mentioned; and you pour very hot oil into the faster, until it reaches near the base; and you do this two or three times, as long as you know that these tracts have dried out, which appear like a bird's feather; then treat with fatty lard, until those tracts swell up, then treat with soothing ointment.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If this is not otherwise healed; and if it attempts to pass through but does not reach the base that lies at or below the foundation, then create a thick covering between your fingers and the fistula where you see the fistula break through the cover as white as cheese; cut the beginning of the fistula and pour in again before the covering, and afterward apply cautery until it reaches to the top of the covering; it will then be freed from the healed tracts, and scab over; then treat those tracts that appear like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the limb remains weakened, causing tension between you and your work; caution with fire or medicinal poultices.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery combines two things: that is, the healing of dislocated joints and stopping blood flow, and removing moisture; then the treatment of stiff tents with fat or finely ground chalk until they are softened, allowing for repositioning of the dislocated bone; then treating wounds from sudden burns on a hard charcoal-like substance, and these remedies are dried.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, it is cleaned and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the base of the foundation, and is pushed away from the body, feel your knee or foot, and check this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent, and between it there is skin or bone or cartilage, or if it needs to be pierced, then only have faith and hope as a remedy through one of these three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut off until the base, or if you see that tents heal themselves and are treated as before; do not cut too deeply, so that you don't cover the structure holding the foundation, and allow for natural discharge when ready; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be cleaned, or remove the covering near the base which has been cauterized, then cleanse and expose it after being opened with a suitable instrument; then examine the displaced bone in the wound to determine how much; then assess how to restore the wound, and keep the fistula at a position further from the foundation: this would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 At no time are there fistulas according to this method: and when you push the tent into the fistula, it is near the base adjacent to the skin above, so take a pierced tent in accordance with this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread at the ends, and then he puts the tent throughout the entire thread in the fistula up to the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is near the base at the skin's edge, then draw out the thread of that pierced area so you can push your finger or foundation into it; and pull on the end of the string, and bring the two heads together and hold them tightly to each other, and leave for 1 or 2 days; keep them restrained at all times until the threads have frayed between them, and then treat the wound until it is well-healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not break open, make it punctured in all ways that you know how, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not require for the lancet to be inserted if too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the spatulum with which one makes a fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; on the other hand, not so, because it cannot be cut in such a way that you see here.
des emorroydes	Of boils
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 There are two ways of doing it: when they are within the foundation like resin grains; there can be small and large ones, and in them blood is found, either one or more; but those that recede from the foundation weaken it and at the head of the foundation; however, those who have the filaments within the foundation require treatment where you command the patient to strain to urinate until the foundation has dried up, and then threads appear; if you hurry, and cut with tweezeboar or by nail, then you sever at its roots; and if you cannot hold them due to moisture, you take a thread, silk, or a piece of camel hide; then you pull out the filaments between your fingers, cut them off, and dust hot powders that are in the place of cauterization; or you cauterize as it is said or written about cauterization, since they heal other wounds until sane; and if the foundation cannot be removed, then wash the patient with a sharp and bitter enema to cleanse what lies at the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the patient strains, and threads are strong in the foundation, treatment is easy; and you should pull them with your nail or tweezers, cut them off, then treat as we have said until sane and avoid incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to treat the wound in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two loops of thread below the needle so that they are wide; tighten the thread firmly, then sew through, remove the needle, and do this with all others, leaving one to carry away excess blood; then put a cloth moistened in oil rose or wax on the foundation, place it there, and command the patient to rest; then let it be until it bleeds, and when they have bled sufficiently, treat with ointment and other remedies until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	In the same manner as the base layer
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that fistulas occur in the intestines, and due to natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medication does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to scrape off the skin at a point or on a nail so that it does not remain moist, then treat until it dries as needed; and if it cannot dry, begin scraping again more vigorously than before, until it heals considerably, and be scorched; then treat until it is sound.
dou fremit	The tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A mouse-bite is a small falsehood under the skin, and it spreads widely; and never allows cold to reach it, and causes pain similar to that of extreme shivering, affecting the entire body, especially the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose's feather or a strong vulture's feather and place that quill on the shivering pain until it stains all around purple; then turn your hand, moving the entire quill as you scrape through it completely, spreading thinly across the shivering area, and root out the shivering from its origins.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a sling of wool or iron according to this form, and be subtle from below and pull gently from above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	as have ase las prises et and moste leu the pointte le plus les conseme tre les points et s'st:
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the suppository
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made is a suppository of silver or brass, or melted lead or wax; and never made are these small and large extracts according to those who have prepared them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they make small suppositories.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the suppository is small or large depending on its width; where the belly is tied following this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And there is an eversion or the belly is tied up as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and have on one side two holes, and on the other I; and let the belly or its owner put medicines from a pouch of animal bladder or parchment, and pierce all around through small holes, with space between each hole, then insert a strong thread of twisted hair X times within, assembled like an ox's stomach; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread in front, then enemas are used; and this is the circular shape.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and grease the surface of the enema with oil or goat butter or similar substance, then pour it in gently; then press the ministers with both hands together until fully emptied, then remove the enema, and allow the patient to raise his legs off the bed so that the medicine may come out as much as possible; if he sleeps a whole night through, this provides greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer the enema for a bowel complaint, and the physician hastens to remove it, then let him continue until he is well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 If the hemorrhoids are at their foundation or abscessed, then let the suppository be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle suppository through which the feces can pass.
des plaies	Wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	do sockets they com:
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to their sources or where the wounds are made, and for what purpose they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things through which wounds are made include the striking of stones, cutting with swords and knives, or spears, lances, arrows, or similar objects; or those that occur according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, thighs, abdomen, liver, and like limbs. And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple scalp wounds, because memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from a stone strike or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn with large wounds, and you slightly suspect an abscess boil: immediately dress the head primarily if little blood comes from the wound, and place the poultice on the opposite of the wounded area; avoid repletion of wine and fatty meats for the patient.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it does not require dressing, have the patient consume less meat, and drink no wine or fatty foods; place on the wound, with cotton balls in oil only, or in medicated wine; and if there is no boiling abscess, put ointment on the fresh wound that has all its blood, which isn't moved by air or powders, as I will describe later; and if it starts to move, apply some ointments until healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	too m
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed of bone, and sharp, and holds only slightly; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore dry leather in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats as tested grains cooked, also like eggs.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or skin rotting, and it does not adhere to the bone, so peel away all flesh, then apply poultice, after which cleanse thoroughly; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without a clot, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, try tying up the artery, and if this does not help, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and it is that you put this powder which heals just as well as the salt has moved (dissolved) it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; lively chalk three parts, and grind finely, apply to the wound, firmly press, until it dries well and reconnects with all its flesh; then rub in well, leave without unraveling, unless it swells; for you do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	; that;
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound has moved due to this, mainly in this state, do not apply any of this powder; but apply some digestible ointments or barley flour made with water and honey until it heals over; then treat with other remedries until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 If bone fractures occur with the wound and it is small, extract carefully using delicate tweezers; and I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound to the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes or in the neck and it is straightforward, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but one finds veins or arteries in the neck being cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, leave only the suture; do not apply any constricting material, as it harms the nerves and causes them to retract; also, place nothing cold on the wound since the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body; but use medicine soaked in warm water like rosewater infused with oil, dissolve it as well, then apply ointments moistened accordingly.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	m il phsi: 1 t
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wounds are deep and filled with blood, pierce or cut slightly below them; if the arrowhead is embedded, and bleeding occurs, remove it, tie off the wound, drain it, and cauterize as needed; if the thorn of the throat is embedded, or something obstructs breathing, causing tissue to protrude, cut above the lump on the throat's skin line without touching the throat itself but restore its natural shape; then tighten it again, leave for several days, and treat with cleansed ointments until healed; if bone pressure is felt from a wound, extract it; if there are small pieces of bone, try to remove them all, leaving any that cannot be removed until the wound subsides and drainage ceases. If the wound is fresh, apply dust as previously mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	and he of ys: ici ne tu l'a les pest le plage soi les morgue his purgatif to you for it all sontre la mercuryne est of love the same, et cures him de a li, prandres anfist. And I pray tell luys themesquat dure of your l'en, and le jus quid tu, si en son ce ou he with its
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound caused by a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a stab wound from a spear or knife, and the injury is deep, then look to see if there are any signs of infection as soon as you notice them: know that the wound is deadly; but if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at once, nor bind it so that the blood cannot flow freely back into the body, causing shock to the patient; instead, apply an attracting ointment, and wrap it twice a day. If you don't have an ointnent, then put some old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more; spasms, tremors of the body, or other symptoms will not occur. And when you see that things are going well, know that the wound is healing.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat with tent and other treatments until it is healed; and if it cannot be healed or operated upon, then recognize that there is an abscess; perform the treatment as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is a cut from a sword or knife, whether simple or on the backside, treat it according to what lies before; if large, suture; and if small, use powder; and if embedded in bone with broken pieces, assess the wound and address the stuck fragments; if they are free, let the wound heal and lighten the extraction process; and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	And rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The fallings of the belly are large and medium and small; from a great wound never does any intestine or its nerves come out; and suturing is more difficult, and it is not worse for a small wound than for a large one, so that when resetting the intestines they require greater care, if you do not return them warm by warm; because the intestine swells immediately when feeling cold, thus they enter with greater force, and therefore less painful are the frequent wounds, as well as the intestine is returned to its place rather than others. And know that treatments of the belly fall into four ways: common sutures occur in the abdominal incision, and sutures from other body injuries and two other specific sutures are common with other wounds; nevertheless they are more proper for an abdomader incision, and I will describe each one and declare them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the wound is small and there are no things from the entrails involved, it's relatively easy to set right; this can be done in one of two ways: due to the size of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swoln from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in the following manner: moisten with an sponge or a linen cloth using lukewarm water only, or boil herbs and cipria and spikenard, to reduce the intestine until it deflates; doing this multiple times can be restricting, but helps to alleviate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the intestine begin to deflate, moisten it with lukewarm or hot water as required, for this eases its passage; and if nothing can enter, make a small incision in the wound using the instrument used to remove boils; the first treatment is to loosen the tissues gently, without cutting unless absolutely necessary, allowing for drainage: cut inside near the hollow part but not too deep, observing its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is expanded, and the intestines come out forcefully, put them back in place according to their natural form in their proper location, if you have power, for it must be moved.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is wide, and it's in the part below the belly, one must make the patient lie on their back with legs raised higher than their head; if it's in the part below the belly, raise the head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and so when there is a protrusion from the abdomen into either of the two sides, adjust to ensure that the affected side is elevated above the other; thus, manage as I describe for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 In this work of the chapter, there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wonders, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. When the shoulder head is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it moving, and the limb being misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Small wounds are treated by placing what has been removed; then have pity with your hands using a minister who takes care of cleaning his hand, and joins the lips; and this is the common way of stitches, and it involves you taking needles or more as needed according to the size of the wound's width, then leave space from the top of the wound about two fingers wide, then insert a needle with good strong thread; and pierce the flesh twice at the cuirass, which is below the skin inside, until you make it perforated in that part, and join the two lips of the cuirass together by all four. Then strain double thread around the needle from both sides, then join the wound's edges immediately, and then leave space as before, and insert another needn
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestines after it had been for fourteen hours; and the wound was dressed up to fifteen days, and he cured him, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the master believed he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not cure him with ointment because I was in a place where there were none or any medicines; instead, twice a day I placed old cotton over the wound, and bathed it with honey water until he became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Here are the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and thread to the part just below up to its core; when it pierces straight through the center where you have inserted the neede, pull out another side from within that area until full; and the understanding of this stitch is as if a shepherd makes wool patches, leaving one fold once and taking it back again, until the entire sewing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of suturing that Galien properly describes is as follows: they assemble the two parts together naturally and apply one head of the needle to the other, in such a manner - insert a needle or eye close by, pierce it there slightly, leave both sides of the flesh; then turn the needle and pierce from that part forward until inside, at both sides of the flesh; then pierce one and then the other side forward into places where are two more holes in the flesh on the opposite side; this is the manner of suturing most commonly used.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galien states this word and others confirm it - one must sew the abdomen with two needles, each having thread; and you should insert one needle on one side and the other on the opposite, in the manner of those who sew belts; and know that when suturing is within the abdomen, then this type of stitching is more grievous than others for the area.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The assessment of the wound is as follows: when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, and if it has moved, reset any intestines or lacerations; then apply powdered charcoal paste, and if it has moved, apply any present ointment until the wound swells; cleanse the thread, tie securely, and perform a cataract. Then treat the wound as you would other wounds until healed; and if no medicines are available, apply cotton and move gently twice daily until it is healthy again.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You do not need any other medicine in addition to the simple wound arrangements; and if you suspect that the wnid makes communion with the main limbs, it is necessary to crush linen lightly in heated oil or rose oil, and place it within bandages, and over the elbows; and if there is pain or swelling at joints, often occurring, then administer a black wine enema internally; especially when the swelling reaches the intestines, pierce inside, and know that since the large intestines are lighter to cure than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are irritated, and this is due to the inflammation of veins, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness in nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the hair sprouts from the wound, and it is reset just like the intestines while they are fresh; and if they become old or blackened, then you must remove the root that is black, so bleeding does not occur again as veins and arteries may be present; then extract what is between the ligaments, and tie two hairs hanging from the part above the wound to ease removal when the hairs grow out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	From the removal of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine protrudes and the wound is small, it can be repaired in some people, for I have seen a man wounded by the stomach of an arrow; and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen, which became infected and turned into a fistula, causing discharges and winds; I treated him accordingly as best I could, and did not cease to subtile until he was healthy again, with no more leaks.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it healed, I suspected that the patient might have an issue in his belly; but there was no harm, only improved conditions, eating and drinking well; some experimentalists said that for a small intestinal wound, it must be treated thus: take a large testicle, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the testicle has opened its mouth, place it between the two lips so they stretch apart; and then cover the head with skin, and this holds tightly enough that it cannot come loose, then put another fomentation afterward in the same manner as before until the entire wound is closed; and thereafter, the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 Those chiefs disintegrate in the intestine and cause no harm to the patient; one can bind the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine: take the end of this thread that is cleaned thoroughly, then tie it with a fine linen twist. Thread the needle, stitch through the intestine, and suture neatly. This method of frantic sewing does not deviate unless following the path of trust and hope; if the wound is large and wide, especially when located in one of the intestinal sacs, there is no remedy or health because it requires subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or if it exists
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Every wound or abscess that becomes old is universally called "fistula", especially when it opens and runs with pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is due to incorrect nourishment hard and bloody, without pain, similar to the beak of a bird; it may run clear at times, and other times thick; sometimes thin, and others sufficiently so; I have discussed in my treatment of wounds that any untreated wound does not heal for one of nine reasons: namely, due to lack of blood or tissue; by its ill-will; because there is hardness inside it and on the edges where no pus comes out; if there is too much discharge; if the tissues are putrid, and the matter has poor quality; if the medicine used for treatment is not good; due to corruption being a form of plague; or due to the property in that region having delayed digestion and health, and fleeing by nature; or because there are veins or bones. I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medicinal treatments.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Thus you must be informed about the treatment of a fistula that is performed by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Le fistule est issue de tous les membres du corps, car il y a fistules qui proviennent des grandes veines, des artères, des nerfs, ou du foie, ou de l'intestin, ou de la vessie, ou d'une côte quelconque, ou du dos vertébral, ou de toute articulation des mains ou des pieds; et s'il est tel que survient au membre principal et à ses similitudes.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 All types of fistulas that resemble those described are serious in terms of healing; there is only hard work and ignorance; if any type of faster does not extend to the places I've mentioned and you have confidence in its cure, and can see it being recognized, then take a tent made of silk or iron if the fistula is straight, use it; and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle tin screen because tin bends easily around the curvature; and if the fistula has openings through which you cannot properly treat with screens due to moisture, cleanse it by one of the openings so that the moisture comes out from one opening to another and purifies. Then firmly grasp it in your power, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and if it protrudes completely, then ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressed with your hand, and where he feels it; and once you know truthfully where it is located, and if it is away from a joint, a vein, an artery, or one of the places I've mentioned, treat accordingly as I have instructed. If the fistula is well-placed deep in its rightful location, then cut out any accompanying pus and corrupted tissue within; then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply placed correctly, use tent stitches with medicinal ague solution to put up to the top of the fistula as far as you can see. Then apply ointments for healthy skin, continuing until it's healed; if not, then cauterize as we have mentioned, and if there is bone corruption from the fistula, treat accordingly (cope).
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If veins or principal limbs are affected; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and darkness, reign over it until all decay has turned to bone, then treat of various matters as much as it becomes healthy; and if it does not become healthy, reopen in the same way as before, being aware that you should not go as far as the wound: uncover and cleanse thoroughly until reaching the bottom, remove all decay, then restore its place; and if it becomes thus healthy, well done.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, understand that the decay is too extensive to reach, there is no other remedy but nature's ligature; and if there are small corrupted bones, you can extract them with pliers, using a suitable instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bnails, remove all of them without leaving any behind; and if moisture hinders the process, and there is no mistake or fear, then cut and dry it out, freeing the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something that causes unpleasant decay, and leave it until the bone is entirely surrounded by flesh; then the bones will be more easily separated. If it's a large bone, like of leg or thigh, apply as much decay to make all the bone blackened, then restore the wound; if there is a great part corrupted and comes near molten bone; you must cover and seal up to the point of corruption, and then heal until it's united; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, where you can take example and aid for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 There was once a youth not more than thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came into the body until materials reached the leg, and it fled from a large abscess, and there was no reason to open; but because of their folly, they worked on it so much that they opened the abscesses, and consumed much material, becoming fistulous, and very many holes in which everything spilled out and moistened the body; and several healers treated him for two years, with no one skilled in the art of hands until I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines used on him, and what flowed through the holes in great volume; and the youth's body turned red, having a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I set up a tent in one of these joints and then searched all the joints, finding that each approached the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Therefore I proceeded and cut into one of the joints until I discovered a part of the bone, finding it corroded and pierced, with the corruption reaching to the inner bone; I saw what appeared from the corroded bebe, suspecting no other corruption except for that which I revealed; and I began to restore the wound using soothing medicines over a long time, but could not sew it shut; then I resumed, discovered the bone as before, found continuous corrosion in the bone, addressed this, removed it, attempted to stitch it up immediately, but could only cut around an inch of the bone, and betrayed the entire bulk, after which I reattempted with medicines; soon it healed and was sewn shut quickly, and thereafter did not recur except due to the patient's weakness who couldn't endure, and fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood is often bloody, but it was completely healed, and in place of the bone a hard socket was born, and it was well-formed and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither on arrival nor departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, do it this way: take a thread, and pull the top of the bone that protrudes; command none to extend it upwards; then use another thicker thread than the first one, tying it over the socket on the bone, extending the top so you can remove the corrupted socket from below, exposing the socket at the place where you intend to work. Do not let the bone slip out of its position; and place a coal or an iron bar beneath the bone to cover the corrupted part; continue treating until it is as visible and palpable as possible that there is corruption, and treat again when necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or one part, expose all of it; then remove a tissue from above, and then move from one part to the other of the corruption so little by little as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and remove any bone that contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there's no other remedy than to use a cauterizing instrument; and if the corruption is at the tip or base of a finger or toe, it is very strong but nonethebore you must find out how this corrosion opens; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but do not let vein or nerve cause you trouble. Know that the cutting instrument and levers for removing these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and appearance of its surface, as well as their thickness and subtlety, size and smallness, hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each type of working tool its instrument; know that your work will show you which instrument you need, according to knowledge of this art and evidence by symptoms of diseases.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may rot or due to humors, or from deficiency; and when you have the medicinal treatment for that corruption with the use of medicines, and they prove ineffective, then cover that limb up to where the corruption occurs, so that the patient escapes either by a stroke of death or by illness, which is greater due to the failure of the limb; and the signs are such that the limb turns black, as if it were burnt with fire, and afterward there follows the darkness, for then those corruptions spread from member to member, taking hold throughout the body; be quick about covering it, and if it's due to the sting of venomous creatures like scorpions or snakes or others, when the corruption is at the head of the knee, protect it and do not give it any time to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it reaches to the hand, cover the joint, ensuring that corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, shield with a garment; and if it passes beyond the garment, it's fatal, with no remedy other than depending on its degree of potency; thus, do as when corrosion occurs or attacks: if it affects the first joint, cover subsequent joints; and if it reaches the limb, shield entirely; and if it ascends to the leg, protect at the knee joint; and if it is above the knee, there's no other recourse than a quick death for the afflicted; the manner of applying bandages or silk should be such that you wrap above and below, extending one strip from each end, cutting open the space between them to the width of a thumb, until bone is revealed; then apply bandage or silk on both sides with linen strips so it does not touch healthy skin, preventing further injury and sores.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 If blood flow is disrupted while working, promptly cauterize the area with caustic substances or apply certain restraining powders; then return to your regular treatment until it's complete, afterwards bind the injured limb with an agreeable ligature and care for it until healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in deep sleep: a blackness appeared that seemed like fire burn marks, first appearing on his thumb all the way through the finger, spreading throughout the entire digit; when the man saw the corrosion, he bandaged the finger with copper strips and it healed. After long periods, the corrosion returned to his hand, moving towards me, and I treated him using impactful methods after body cleansing, but couldn't stop the corrosions; so I covered his hand and didn't know if the material would reflect off; I also doubted whether cutting his hand could save him since his vitality was weak. He despaired entirely, returned to his homeland, bandaged his own hand with copper strips, and it healed. And there are no further stories like this unless one needs them for other purposes.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 An abscess does not occur in its place of origin and it remains so long that a large collection of pus forms; then they burst and drain, the pus flows out, and the original openings close as with untrimmed veils; and the skin over is as subtle as cut-up cloth, but will not run to the bone or nerve, thus such diseases are called 'healed' and not 'fistula'; but if it becomes so large that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called 'fistula'; and the skin must be excised entirely around it, especially when subtle as cut-up cloth; without cure for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If you suspect that the skin is sore, and there is no full decay, but rather of earthy color, then this treatment with an enema: check if the cheeks are large, and the bow which is in them smells bad and unpleasant, thus you should administer the Egyptian medicine as follows: take ease, oil, and litargyrion equally, and put to cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine becomes red and thick like honey; then take some according to your need, and make it with water and hebetement (mildly sweet), and enema into the cheeks, straining the passage; leave the medicine inside for two hours, then extract by squeezing; do this many times until the cheeks are fully healed, and there is no discharge. Do not use water clisters of ashes when this Egyptian medicine is present; instead, take ash from grapevine wood and pour water over it, then filter with a cloth in enema until you know that the cheeks are well cured; if the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes clister, use an enema with just water and honey where there is a little litargyrion. Or for mild wine vinegar, which has properties to cleanse and wash away impurities and makes healthy; after doing so, when you are certain that the cheeks are properly healed, administer an enema of substances causing blood production with oil rosette (rosemary) and honeyed wine. Or use other medicines and unguents as previously described; if the passage in the cheek is narrow and cannot receive the clister, slightly widen it using a piece of iron, then apply an Egyptian or basilicon ointment until sufficiently dilated; if the wound is too wide, leave enough space so that the clister can enter properly.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bow is in its fullness, do not leave it uncovered; and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it so that the bow slopes to the lowest point possible because when the bow is at full stretch, do not leave it uncovered, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way: let the bow slope gently downward, and leave nothing of the bow; and take consolidating medicines to put on the skin, and extend over a linen bandage that covers all the area. Then cover the force at the navel with a slightly wider first bandage, apply ointment under another cloth according to the size of the puncture, and place it on the puncture for easing the bow, and do not remove the large bandage until after many days; and he who is over the naval bandage should frequently change so as to release the bow, and know from which direction the bow originates if it's venom or a small amount, or digestible, or indigestible. Also take care whether the patient feels pain or fever, and if there are abscesses or not, and when your medicine has been extended in such a way that you observe the nature underneath the naval bandage, know that the breast is healed, and approaches health; then release it in the morning or on the second day, and after opening the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become irritated and indigestible after many days, assure that they do not swell.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle corruption comes after long periods of time, do not despair of health, for recovery is nearing.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are those who delay healing in their wounds, and others do the opposite; if an indigestible pus emerges from the breast after many days, be assured that the breast is not fully healed; if it delays healing, it becomes protracted, so administer medicines dried moist in substance and dry in virtue, like a diaphoretic, for there is a large part of vitriolic matter, and this is the final medicine; take a diaphoretic tincture, and mix with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance; then boil it down and use it. Likewise, do the same with honey-cooked fatty substances when diaphoretic tinctures are not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, and powder over honey while it is on fire; then wrap in a cloth, apply to the breast, and do not administer any long-lasting ointment nor celestial lily roots (similar to barley flour or meal); use simple remedies or compounds: grind them, turn into powder, mix with honey as mentioned before, and use it; if the condition is protracted and not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has penetrated fully, causing pressure in the bone, hardened parts, or ligaments; follow the treatment for fistula, as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	For the incising of an abscess on the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A boil arises from under the nail of the hand or foot, or it may occur on other parts; and when it is full-grown without being noticed, a sore forms, spreading and weeping until it reaches the root of the nail, potentially encompassing the entire area; leading to infections up to the bone causing pungent pain, with swolebreast chest wide, and the color is unhealthy.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 If you treat it as we have said in the section on boils, and if the treatment does not help, then one must excise all the excess matter lodged under the nail, followed by cauterizing the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The caustic is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on a vein, and it begins to swell, and bruise, then you must place your knife under the nail so that the vein does not throb, cut the vessel upward, and gently and subtly remove the fluid, then apply remedies with heating and corrosive properties to eliminate all traces; afterwards treat it with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the bone is corroded, scrape it out, and grind through, for as long as the bone continues to decay, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint corroding, follow the procedure previously described, then treat it until healthy again; and if there is a fistula, with pus, and it causes great pain, first cleanse it; then cut off the nail at the base of the spatula-like growth from the side, being careful that you do not reach the vein underneath the nuge, as the patient would experience too much pain; and if this occurs, apply something to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the w asse t m;
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocated shoulder that exists in some men by chance is all flesh, and sometimes it has bone, or sometimes no bone at all; none of these arise from the root of the joint where the origin lies among us within the shoulders.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one that arises in any of our shoulders does not move, and the one that arises at the joint of the shoulder by chance may move; the size of the fleshly ones is light, so shape it at its root with a wide span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of a joint are particularly difficult to treat: hold them with your cup-handled instrument.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In those who arise or are ours in the next one, it is necessary to first cut around the roundness up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate thread, and treat until it heals soundly.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	the t. If thra et le;
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to treat the swelling so that it may heal according to its natural form; then place between two layers of cloth or linen soaked in oil and rosewater, so they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of fine glass until the joints are soldered as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.
des vils	 If necessary, treat with poultices
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 They are large swellings wrapped in excessive malaise that come upon various body parts; and more often it occurs in the legs of those who walk barefoot or work and carry things, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	which ine. the tand:
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is in two ways: one way is to apply poultices and draw out the black blood; and the other method is to open a vein and bleed it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The body is thus treated in this manner: first raise the leg with hot water as strongly as necessary so that the swelling subsides, then strain the leg from above the hip to the area below the knee; then cut open the veins at one place, either one or two or three times wide, and squeeze out the black blood into your hand, from top to bottom, until as much as the virtue of the sick person can endure; then bind it up, and instruct them to dye with dark meats; and resume the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The treatment of the parts is as follows: raise the sick leg, if it has a lot of hair, then put it in bathwater, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and inflames the veins; and if you don't have a bathing tub, heat it on fire, and then make an incision at the long part above the knee or below the hip joint; then work around the edge of the skin, and peel off the skin from each side until it feels like when one senses it; then it appears red and black, and when inserted into flesh, it seems as white as a bleached rope; then push the knife under, until it's raised to the level of the skin, and then tie it gently with string, then make another incision above at about three finger widths; then peel off the skin around the vein so that it feels like before, and then pull it up along the string as you did first; then make another incision, or however many more if needed, and then lift, and tie to another loop, just as done previously; then cut between tissue layers until all flesh is removed, then sew it closed; and if one cannot suture and remove it, they insert a double-strength needle through the entire wound, and stitch up and out at one side, until gone; and ensure that it does not tear apart, as if it tears, it cannot be sutured or removed, causing harm to the patient; after having completely treated it, place malleable lambswool soaked in wine and oil over the wound site.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 If the vein is twisted and entwined altogether, and it is not straight as we have said, then one must cut it crookedly but not cover it; treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of iron used to clamp the vein is curved and does not cut; it grasps the vein. And it has a large curve because if it were delicate, it would grasp the vein but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 Of civil blood (referring to non-military patients)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This blood is found in legs, warm parts where no plants or trees grow and the soil does not have moisture; sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which occurs from the decay that originates beneath the skin like what happens inside the body with serpents and worms nestled between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 If the signs at the beginning of this vein are such that it appears as a large inflammation in the leg, then changes occur in the eyes, and the vein begins to protrude outward like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the eye is exposed, it should be wrapped with a piece of cloth from 1 to 2 and half inches up to 3 inches, along with the nose, leaving the cloth on the leg, and each time when there is no more gauze, wrap around the cloth, and the nose; if it is too long, cut off a part, and continue wrapping the remaining portion, without covering its root until completely exposed; because if you cover it, it will retreat into the head, causing an abscess or infection at that spot, and serious illness. Therefore, this vein should be treated gradually and carefully until nothing remains but skin; there has never been a case where this vein issues from 5 inches to 10 when handled properly. And once it is covered, it swells up by the handful or foot, and when wrapped, it bursts at the base and splits all the way down to its root, so everything inside comes out; then empty it of any material within, and apply medicinal poultices without delay, as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 At no time should you puncture this vein again, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or ankle, and there is a lot of bleeding, so be sure to treat as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 From worms that emerge between flesh and skin
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This illness is called "ox disease" in our land because it often occurs in the bile, and is a small worm that emerges between skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, causing discomfort all over from limb to limerent where it goes, and cuts deep; and plagued by the putrefaction of various humors, as they come in serpents, earthworms, ascarids or intestines. Doubt arises about its nature because when it moves through the body, it ascends to the head, reaches the eye, sometimes entering and destroying it; this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being drained and pulled, it cannot be forcibly moved; thus, it is appropriate to lift the area above and below a strong ligament tightly, then cover with a cloth and pull forcefully, ensuring that if it does not come out easily, cauterize with fire until it moves; the greatest harm it causes is that fluids flow down like we have said. If you see it coming or near to the oil, firmly press on the eyebrows, then cover and pull forcefully; it is necessary to use body purification with soluble medicinal remedies for evil humors, and wash with putrefying meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called 'wakiry' in our land, and it causes pain that moves from one limb to another; and this is what I have seen and will tell you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to see a sick woman, and found her with swollen arms, and I saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm; and shortly afterward, I observed it rising as quickly as if it were a worm on the shoulder, faster than any other thing, like silver being cut from one place to another; the pain moved away from that spot, settling into the shoulder, then spread through her whole body until it reached the other arm; she told me how it returned back inside the body just as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never encountered this illness in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 However, I wanted to maintain that moving the pain from there elsewhere should be possible, but I did not succeed as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and exposed veins, and so appeared constrained flatulence; and those who are delicate do not perceive it according to this reason, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to heal this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, quickly lift it above and below firmly, then cauterize at the spot; and if you do not find it under your nails, treat the one who causes flatulence, like foul pills, and pills of saffron, and similar things.
des saiettes	 Of arrowheads
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrowheads are various, according to their appearances and where they pierce the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The variety of them is that some have large points, small points, barbed points, and fused; and those with angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that enters any limb does so in two ways: either into the principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it enters any part of these members, the sign of death that I will tell you shortly becomes apparent: then one must beware extracting this arrowhead, for death comes in various forms; and if this bad sign is not seen, and the arrowhead is not entirely embedded, treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, causing a swelling on the forehead which is blinded, dazed, strained, reddened in all parts, with inflammation and redness of tongue, spasms, disturbed understanding, vomiting of bile; and perhaps it has no strength in the nose or ears; and by chance affects speech and voice; and as if from a wound soaked white like hair, similar to being burned by fire; and when these signs appear, be vigilant for treatment, and extract the arrow if not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrowhead when it falls into the body is near the left breast and feels as if embedded in a hard object, not hollow; sometimes the arrow shifts like hairs and comes out with black blood, accompanied by chills, cold sweat, fainting: then understand that death may follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	and noir, yet the paist ents. And:
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	When the arrow falls into the area of the lower breastbone, it is near the small ribs; causing great pain and sighing, they move all parts of the shoulder blade.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, perhaps it may be from an open wound where there is undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it does not exit through the intestines, there is no hope for healing or extracting the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	When an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine flows out with a gush, causing the patient great pain; understand that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs - how they are made and the neck, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, buttocks, thighs, and similar parts - are safe according to various arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous - as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to one man that an arrow struck his head near the root of the nose; I tried it, and pierced from another side through the ear fat, and was sound without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pierced another arrow into the fat of the eyebrow below, and the arrow was stuck, unable to reach beyond its shaft's end, being a large Turkish bow with any light metal except for earrings; the joint remained sound, with no incidents occurring.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pierced an arrow in the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabian arrow with earrings: I removed the beard and carefully aimed until striking, leaving the Christian unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And you pierced an arrow at the liver, where it was stuck or protruding, and thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow shaft, manipulated it, removed it completely, and there were no adverse consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if there is a home where an arrow has fallen on the back and is stuck in a tightly bound wound; and although the arrow remains within him, it does not alter his natural dispositions or cause harm to any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And you see another man where an arrow has fallen on his face and is bound in a wound; it causes him great pain to remain there, along with many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And one arrow struck the king among princes, lodged in his neck, and was slightly declined to the right side; and the arrowhead had protruded completely. I was called for treatment after it occurred three days prior.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I approached it with great subtlety and did not feel it myself; but it caused pressure and pain from his right earlobe.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead and placed a poultice with soothing and digestive properties because the wound did not inflame; and then appeared were the arrow's grooves.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I kept the poultice on for several days, and relieved the wound completely, so that the patient suffered long times until he felt the arrow inside his neck one day; and then informed me of it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 After applying the corrosive medicinal water with my hands until it was open and tried it, I felt the head of the arrow adjusting to its place; then I supported the opening of the wound with that same medicinal water until the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and for more than four months it healed well from within. Then I applied heat to the wound so I could extract the arrow, holding one side while pulling out the other, but it couldn't be removed; then I ceased applying subtle tricks and devised various methods of extraction until on a day with properly made pincers, I successfully extracted it according to how its form will appear in this chapter's conclusion, and tended to the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: it will be reset immediately, and the wound is closed, and the patient is entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 Or I have told you the quality of arrowhead extraction; that you apply your care to what I do not say, for the book cannot cover everything; but wise masters often accomplish much with little effort and focus on present issues and deficiencies, performing nine works with nine instruments in addressing extraordinary matters encountered in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrowheads lodged in the limbs are of two types: those inserted directly or from another direction; and those protruding where they entered, these are arrowheads entering fatty tissues, and never occur more than once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not come out now, let it remain until the cartilage is properly formed and freed from attachment; and if it is wedged in the bone, and cannot be extracted, leave it for several days, moving slightly each day; and then it will come out, and if it still does not come out, pierce all around a very fine hole until the cartilage around it is loosened, then extract.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is embedded in the top of the skull and approaches one of the brain's ventricles, and some of the accidents I have openly mentioned to the patient: do not extract it immediately, but leave it until it has stabilized after several days, because if the arrowhead reaches its socket, it means death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrow is not stuck only in the bone and does not reach an abscess, and the patient remains without any adverse effects for several days, then use the method of milking.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply lodged and cannot be removed forcefully, then apply a poultice around it as I have instructed; then heal the wound until it becomes clean.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrow is reset in the body and cannot be seen, then carefully examine the entire area; if you can feel it, use any suitable instrument; if you cannot probe or deepen the wound because there are no bones, nerves, or veins, and the wound remains large; draw out the arrow if possible. And if the arrow has ears to which it is attached on both sides with movable parts that can be seen, remove the char embedded by breaking or bending these ears, ensuring not to break the arrow so you can extract it more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	it; and mont that heal not d the f et they prese bon line y or. Doe to you know them:
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 If the condition of blood worsens in opposition, follow the treatment as we have said in its chapter; and beware of cutting a nerve or a vein, and devise a method to extract the arrowhead without danger, quickly or soon, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell into him, for that is the greatest aid possible, and if you cannot, set it as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 If the arrow comes from another part or has caused any damage to it or if there is noticeable swelling in an area where you can see or feel abnormally: thus cut above, as far as pincers can grasp, and then extract it; if it springs out forcefully now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is caught in the bone, turn your round hand, until it enters the bone and widens it, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 If it cannot be removed, let it remain for now, and then resume the extraction as long as it can be withdrawn; and if there is an arrowhead still present, apply pressure all along its length; and if it breaks, administer soothing treatment immediately, using a suitable instrument that allows the tip of the arrowhead to enter into the hole of the instrument; then withdraw firmly, and if the arrowhead becomes lodged, use the instrument pointed end first, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is touched, it's necessary to remove any remaining poison-containing tissue if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrowhead breaks or gets stuck in the abdangle area or bladder or ribs, and it's close to being extracted, remove what you can if possible, then extract it completely; be careful not to damage blood vessels and nerves during extraction, then treat the wound as necessary; care for the wound until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pincers used to treat arrow wounds resembles a bird's beak, and so does this one:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow shaft.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's beak, to push into the tip of the arrowhead, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	with tongs to push and pull as described:
des voinnes dou cors communes	in common body openings
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins one can see are thirty-one in total, of which there is the head sixteen, that is: two superficial arteries behind each ear called "herbche"; and the two prominent arteries visible on the temples; and the two veins found inside the eyelids called "aspire"; and the vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and the two jugular veins that are located in the neck; and the two veins found on each lip above the mouth, known as the "aurichs" veins; and the veins behind the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins which are commonly bled in each arm: the one is cephalic, and is located towards the left side of the neck; and they call it among common people "vein of the head"; and the other is called "fast", composed of cephalic and basilic, and they call it among common people "vein of the body"; and the basilic is on the right side of the neck, and they call it among common people "vein of the abdomen", and is under the clavicle, and that's the one from which we bleed, clearly visible above the collarbone.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the salving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, with two branches; and in the leg where the knee is there are three veins: the first one is above the groove of the left arm pit, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nerve", that is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are three veins under those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The blood of veins that are after the ears aids in ancient catarrhs and migraines; and its quality, as I have told you, is to lift the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with an abrasive cloth; then tighten the neck with a cord until both veins appear behind the ears at two lengths from the top of the head: tie these securely on your finger, and wherever you feel hair above your wrist, bind it; then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein towards yourself, and pare away the skin and tissue well within its course, and let blood flow until clear; then tighten and tie it off so that it is clean. And I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The vein of the two arteries that are in both temples, if it becomes inflamed early on, is swollen and hardened, accustomed to the tears being shed from the eyes; and its condition is as I have said: and it is such that the patient stretches his neck until the veins become clearly visible; feeling pain behind his ears, then he starts rubbing them; then raise your head slightly above the index finger over the vein, and insert the lancet below, lift the vein upwards, and collect the blood in a cup as you have done with other veins, and let out blood according to your needs; then leave the patient, and after an hour place a cotton pad on it; and afterwards compress firmly, leaving until healed; we have had discussion about their bandaging and extraction, or how the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The drainage of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the drainage for head ailments from ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and redness; and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "sawyer," of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the tip over the vein, and raise your hand (or another object), allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck and tie off the vein until it is completely blocked and ensure no bleeding occurs from a wide incision.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Indeed, it is not necessary for the flames to be too large; and the shaft should be straight, as the bone is close by, and sometimes the flame breaks when it becomes thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The drainage of veins in two temples helps with eyes, tingling, redness, ear pain, and face diseases; the quality of their drainangs that the patient twists his neck without any bindings as before; then stop the bleeding, and make a puncture, slightly long, and somewhat wide, for there is no healing.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then apply enough blood as needed, and afterwards bind with gauze securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein of the neck is as well for ague, and dropsy, and face diseases such as migraine and redness that comes upon the face, especially when it is long-standing; and its qualities are such that the sickly tighten their collar, then strain their neck with their left hand, taking a slender flame lengthwise, and inserting it into the space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well, and the blood will begin to flow now; do not go in too deep, and let the blood drain according to your necessity, then tie it off for one night, as it is quickly restored; this is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The straining of the muscles aids in stretching the limb, at the beginning of massage therapy, and many diseases, including impetigo, corrosion, herpes, and erysipelas; and the quality of the strain is such that the patient stretches his neck from one side to another as we have said; and be seated with masters on both sides of the ill person, who then ties a long strip of cloth tightly around the head for a while, releases it quickly so blood drains, or as much as needed; then wraps in the other vein area, secures the lien (ligament), and gently strains both veins so that the patient does not strangle themselves; and leaves them until morning when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the windpipe from books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of vein lips above helps with boils in the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits in lips, and toothaches and throat problems.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The quality of this is to seat the patient in front of you and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right side and the other on the left, recognizing them by being black and having small dark vessels around them: so clamp both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, clamp the larger of each pair, and likewise with those above and below, for they are all made alike.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of the veins underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The veins under the tongue assist after cerebral venesection and are found at the widening of the throat, and with eye diseases, and mouth ailments; the quality of this venesection is that the patient should lie between your hands in the sunlight, lift their tongue, and look down on each side for a black vein: so clamp both, but not too tightly, as they are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins to be opened which are commonly cut according to two methods: either by pinching at every hair's whiteness, or with a sharp and keen tool called "anesil"; they are wide and subtle depending on the width and extension of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of myrtle paste is much renowned, and it is broad as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open the hair-like plain veins that contain much visible blood and turbidity; this is the form of the olive-shaped flaw.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed, used for treating subtle veins, where there is a fine lemon-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, neck, groin, and abdomen; it is necessary for the cauterizer to cut cleanly, and he must wash his hands from the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if you cut the artery, and blood flow begins, then it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not burn but rather trimmed like hair.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the vein does not open clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another; or you want to remove all of its branches, or bring into place the vein within the arm: it opens clearly; and trim the flame like hair, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you see the limpness of the vein, then it is necessary to extract its branch and touch the flesh until you recognize the hairs; then mark the place with a sign, then bandage the arm, and trim the vein like hair with fire; and be cautious not to injure the artery when you see the limpness swell, for it is from the artery: thus flee.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it bulging upward like a child's urine, and the wound is red and subtle, know that it is from an artery: act quickly then, and extend your finger underneath for a long time, then gently remove your finger when it no longer bleeds; this often happens; if the arm remains, leave it as such, and do not move the afflicted person; let them remain in fear until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	the re la tholes.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a slice of fistulae, and split it, and take one half and bind until the next day; if bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then cure as we have said with powders that stop blood; healing times may vary depending on the small size of the wound and the strength of the person's arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein of the artery provides such assistance that it draws blood from above and below, as it is composed of basilar and cephalic parts, as we have said; and the surgeon must cleanse himself for the nerve located beneath, and if he cut too deeply, he may sever the nerve, causing swelling and numbness in the area, and possibly unable to heal; this nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any individuals due to its subtlety, one must probe with an instrument of steel; and avoid injuring the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between two nerves, it causes long pain.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The cephalic vein provides assistance in drawing blood from the head and aids the eyes; it is appropriate to puncture at the location of the olivary gland or spleen, as this is the safest among all veins since there are no nerves or arteries below them.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 However, it is necessary to choose the lighter position, and do not worry anything if it must be done for the first time, and start again; and sometimes the joint swells in some men when doing it for the first time, but there is no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about healing is that it's not performed solewartly for maintaining health and avoiding future diseases; and the treatment should be done in one of the three veins: namely cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and treatments should begin at dawn or after meals in autumn and winter when signs of fullness appear; and you must heal on the first day or third, two to four hours later.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The healing that is administered for illnesses does not have a fixed time, but as needed during the day or night, at all hours and times; and it does not suit to treat children up to fourteen years old, nor women carrying more than seven weeks pregnant.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should you treat an elderly person over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When anyone wishes to be healed in any way, they should cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not bring excess fluids which are harmful to the main organgans; and one does not treat those who are too weak from foods, or drunkards, in any way; and after suffering from colic pain, vomiting, abdom.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that flee as quickly as strings of a lute, and some so full of windiness such that when placed on the flame, it retracts back to the flame, unable to open the vein, thus these cases arise; and if the vein opens, then the wound is too narrow, therefore one must be cautious in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, try again for a while from that place where you worked hastily, unless the lump has swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the wound is swollen and the patient becomes hopeful, leaving it for a day or two without binding the arm: perhaps abscesses will form; do not give them a bath then restart dressing if desired by him; and if the opening is small or subtly cut asunder and you doubt that there isn't much blood as you see, trust in the same opening with all the flame directly; apply a bit of salve quickly so that the wound may swell slightly.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not repeat the dislocation, and apply a bit of oil paste, for it eases the pain in the body with blood, and softens what is hardened there; thus treat each vein you find by applying the oil paste to them, to stop the flow of blood; similarly handle triacle and bowels when they are placed on the joint; they become subtle and separate easily if too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if a large abscess occurs frequently, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you hasten; apply moistened sponge in warm water and salt, and hold for an hour; then do this after the blood from the vein has drained, and if there remains at the site after several days a blackness or greenish tint, cause it no harm; and if you see anything resembling aloes or myrrh dissolved in calamine juice, monitor.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often occurs an abscess and appearance of the sore on the bladder: so place your hand over it, and if you find the area soft to pressure with your hand, then that is the bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then accordingly do not place anything on any of the things we have said, for perhaps in the court without touching an artery; but make a dry plaster with .i. substance to harden the area, then heal it with another remedy until it is sound.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see that it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too warm, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 For those who are plain and exposed, and require blood extraction, make a wider wound for them; and for the weak, do the opposite by giving minimal sustenance frequently rather than intermittently, and when nourishing, cut across rather than pricking; this method of care prevents excessive bleeding and swelling of nerves, and is better whether the healing is long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For those whose body needs nourishment for healing, give them moistened bread with pomegranate juice; if they are weakened, feed them three or four times a day; and if of cold constitution, offer moistened bread in honey syrup before the meal, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, and sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If it is palm to the sinew after much blood loss, then one must administer a pounded mixture of charcoal and aromatic syrup, and use other things as mentioned in the chapter on fainting for draining veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he wishes to unbind the arm and suspend it another time if needed, when weakened by great fatigue, so that it is loosely done according to the amount of its continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wishes to unbind the arm after the first suspension and is strong-bodied, then it should be loosened for six hours after the first suspension or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wishes to suspend another limb, then he must do so on the second day or later.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body that has become overheated, and fever occurs; if it requires draining a large quantity of blood, and widening the vein until blood gushes forth like milk from a pail; then tend to all conditions of bruising, and place your hand under hair as soon as it bleeds, so that death does not occur at the puncture site, which happens many times when healers are negligent. And do not proceed if you see the arm is disconnected, nor force blood out a second time with pressure on the closed vein; but if it is swollen, extend the arm quickly because that would be harmful; rather let it bleed again until there is no congealed blood in the veins. Afterwards, point something sharp to open and make an incision in the vein, then place a few drops of boiled water into it and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if bleeding is needed a second time, cleanse the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins within the arm are cleansed in the area of the main vein because it is composed (of them).
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The method of healing is that the patient places his hand in hot water until the fingers are red; then tie it securely so the vein appears well, and let the blood flow through across, neither wide nor long; make the puncture large, place it close to the joint of the hand, ensuring no leakage, if not reheat with hot water, allowing blood to continue flowing until sufficient; and since it is winter, do not retie without heat, for this vein treatment saves better than all others, as there are neither arteries nor nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The healing of the salvatelli of the right hand is effective for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done: stretch the hand and place in hot water until the vein flows out, as you can see; if the blood runs across, and if you cover entirely, do not harm anything; do not go too deep, because nerves are always close to cartilage, so then put your hand back in hot water, ensuring that the blood has congealed at the wound and cannot leak out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and honey to it for rapid healing, and do this with each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve of the eye in the left hand is effective against the disease of scabies, and do as I have told you with the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The fire cautery of the anus is suitable for all diseases that arise within the body, such as diseases of the bones, and retention of urine, and disease of the veins, and pains in the thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the qualities of its fire cautery are such that the patient may blow smoke into warm water and rub on the vein until it becomes pale, and apply it above the joints by the foot; and the veins go out abundantly from there, so you should cleanse it or use a wider syringe, or at the ankle where movement is effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cleanse it at the foot, beware of any nerves that are exposed, and dress the wound as when bandaging a limb; let the padding be evenly placed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if no blood can escape, put the foot in water and ensure thorough draining of the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the fire cautery requires a second time just above a bit, for the flesh is swollen; do not hesitate about nerves as we have said, and thus apply it to the anus of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The lameness of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and its swelling causes pain in the hip when it's hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The nature of its health is that the patient lies in or near a bath and extends above the ankle by four fingers' length while twisting, as otherwise it will not open the vein; if opened, treat the area thoroughly and across; carefully cut away until sufficient removal has been achieved, for the joints are loose, and it is greatly swollen.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 If you do not manage it, clean any part that opens or exposes the second toe and towards the little toes, and protect from nerves; treat thoroughly with blood-letting as needed, then loosen the ligament and apply cotton bandage; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 From vein bleedings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, glass, or ivory; and suction is done in two ways: by piercing to draw blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This ventilation method that feels like striking is done in two ways: one with intense heat and the other with less heat; ventilation made by puncturing and bloodletting is performed at fourteen locations on the body - some are all at the top, others at the neck's middle, some at both sides of the neck, under the chin, over each shoulder blade, above the hips, along the arms, across both legs, around both ankles; this ventilation does not drain blood, only minor veins scattered throughout the body, thus anyone can endure it as with vein opening, and it should neither be done hastily nor at intense heat in any disease arising from congestion until all bodily fluids are expelled.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if it becomes necessary due to illness or customs, we perform ventosmos at the beginning of each month and at its end, every day; for there are those who, when they need ventosmos, have a heavy headache; and those who experience bloating and redness in their face, forehead, and neck, along with darkness to their eyes; and others who encounter drops of blood in their mouth, swelling of the tongue, and bleeding; and there are some who think and see through blood-soaked, painful, and deadly visions.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order to ventose after three and a half hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The sanitation of the brain also assists in head strength ... that comes to them, and it should not be done after evacuating all their body; this ventosmos is for cerebral cleansing, and only those with a cold constitution or who have catarrh should use it, as it greatly harms others; therefore, neither the elderly nor those with head colds should use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who suffer often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to apply the poultice slightly lower due to suspicion of dislocation.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventilation in the neck is at the level of the temple and the basilica, and for this reason it requires extension of the liver, and fissure of the channel of the windpipe, and everything else, and repletion; and it should not be pressed much, because if held too firmly, it may cause an obstruction or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Ventilation of the two ribs in the neck causes pain in the head, dizziness and migraine, strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth; it is at the level of the temple of the basilasterium. You must instruct the chirurgeon to express his hand when placed, so he does not cut an artery or allow blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation from below the chin causes mouth disease, and decay of gums, and various diseases that are in the mouth; it is in the sanctueby the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The swelling of the shoulders is an illness that comes from heat and filling up.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventriculation of the elbows is as much as from III veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is close to tendons and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and conditions below them, so it must be large, made of linen, and need to be well wrung; and sometimes if they are too thin, they may break; causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The buboes of the legs drain blood readily, for they attract blood from all over the body, and are worth their weight in old-time headaches, and of kidneys, and bladder issues, and relieve spasms; and they lie at two sophistries, and two ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, and bring about paralysis in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the bubo is that you first put it in an empty place and do so promptly, and set it quickly, and move equally, and do not cease doing so until you see the redness and swelling, and appear with a dull blood; then tighten, and remove the ventouses, and take care of the condition of the body, for there are some who have scabies and clear pores: it is sufficient to prick once only, and make large shallow cuts.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the bubo is large, you should prick twice: the first time to facilitate the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the bone is severely damaged, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood at a time, we should only do so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we wish to draw much blood, let us often repeat the process; and if the vein is spongy, cut it deeply, so that the vessels are pierced firmly, and for those with thick and hard skin, and who have tight veins, anoint the elbow areas of healing oil: if so, violet or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if not, cress, lily, camomile, or similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of frankincense, or balm of galangal, or aniseed oil, and other like substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 If one applies to the tender and broad skin with a tinder, there is no need to put oil on it, but after ventosation with rose water or cold water, or berry juice, or cucurbit pumpkin water, or porcelain pitcher water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should get up easily, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with large swellings rise from old wine or watermelon water, or nettle infusion or chamomile decoction, or similar; and they should not anoint with a plaster before the bath nor during it but after two hours of the bath; and they must not sleep after ventosation but need to sweat when ventosated and needed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And he should keep things cool who is prone to colic and whose stomach is too hot and inflamed; it is necessary that they eat cold foods such as pomegranates, endives, lettuces easily, and similar things; mugwort sprouts, quail eggs, and chestnut charcoal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And those with cold complexion should drink syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, along with a small portion and sprouts of mugwort, quail eggs, and little birds and pigeons; and the day they will experience wind cooling, they must drink more than eat. It is necessary to offer some homes triacle or musk before or after ventilation, or to comfort their main members; but subtleizing the stomach should only be done for those who are hot with it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The suction cups that are placed without causing pain are those applied to the liver, and feet, and gout, and abdomen, testicles, groin, and ankle, because this part of the body cannot be pierced anywhere, and one only does it so to draw blood from one limb to another as we do on children's nipples when they are not healed; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply suction cups to the abdamen and scrotum to reduce the limb size; and alleviate pain, when there is swelling or stones, so it may draw out the swelling by its attractive power accidentally, or desert the stone from its place; thus it acts when applied to the liver and feet when viscosity is retained, and these suction cups are arranged empty to squeeze as needed; they are sometimes filled with fire and sometimes with plain water like in diseases of pleurisy, and so one fills the suction cup with hot water or water that has been boiled with aromatic herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the blister treatment using fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 It should be of two fingers' breadth and half a palm in width, and it should have around the middle a small orifice like that for pushing a needle, made of silver or iron so as not to blister the patient when placed on the limb; there should also be across the middle a rod of cross-shaped iron or steel, used to hold a candle in place, and they come in large and small sizes according to the diseases and conditions of those who use them; because children's suction cups are different from those of adults, and slender ones from fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 One must thus apply this suction cup to the limb: take a tallow candle or salve and place it across the rod in the center of the ventouse, ensuring that the light is at the bottom of the ventose without burning the patient; then position it on the limb, with the aforementioned orifice nearby so that when desired, steam arises and the ventose is removed; take up the salve as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the cupping method then used for pleurisy treatment, it has no penis or scrotum and is arranged only when full of water, and placed on the limb completely. And that's how it works.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without cups are arranged only for limbs where you cannot place cups due to their small size, like lips and gums, as well as similar areas; and in the grooves of teeth that resemble dew droplets or beads, along with others like them; and its use is such that when you find cups filled with soft clear waters without any residue, collect them; and place them into a clean water bath until they are fully saturated, having nothing in their cavities; then drain the blood vessels and cups; and rub the limb until it turns red, placing the cups afterward; and when they become full, and bulge out, if you can put on a cup in that area, do so because this is very beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, lift the limb slightly, then bathe thoroughly in water, very well, and then compress; and if the joint pains too much after removing from the body, moisten a linen cloth with cold water, place on it, until swelling is reduced; and if there are multiple swellings, apply crushed vitriol or ointments, among other things, until they subside; or you may put half of fried beans on it, leaving them until they harden at the site, which will now seal up; and if more is needed, take additional poultices.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the swellings do not diminish, rub the fresh blood on it and insert a needle until you see the blood flowing out of them; then place them there, and as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry; and when you see that they begin to ooze, sprinkle with some powdered aloe or ash, which will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and involve the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Seek ye wise scholar, that the mad master delves into this treatise, which has never been seen in any ancient books nor letters read; and hence the knowledge is foreign to our land, for I have found no good ones; of it I know nothing but by the wisdom of ancient books, or I have studied so much thereof as to be versed in its science, and through experimentation, and by the custom of my life. And I have described herein what is contained within this chapter, and abbreviated at the end, showing clearly the forms of dislocations that are treated, as I have done in these two chapters afore.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say or prologue of this book contains the essence of words and chapters in which the wise man places his understanding, and remains on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or spracks occur in any part of the body, you must urgently treat the patient on either side if nothing covers them completely, as with weak joints, children, or old men; or if their heat is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid fatty frost-like foods such as cold soups, poultry, and lamb, do not drink wine, nor eat any greasy meats, and do not overfill with foods that fill the veins with blood until you are free of concern for an abscess or discharge of matter from the limb; then the patient will return to their former state.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with meats that cause nourishment or thickness like cooked wheat in water, and rice, lamb testicles, liver, bacon, eggs, fresh fish, large wine, and such things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	To partial dislocation, there appear movements and sooner fractures occur.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well rejoined or soldered according to their nature for limb support, nor those also who are too tender, like bones of small children; but pay no mind, reset with large tenons which fit and join the member together until it is strengthened as it was before; and do not abandon all your efforts, and therefore you must nourish them with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	le f s.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that go to breaking, others by splintering, as the sharpening of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that's just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each manner has its method and proper instrument for restoration, according to what is remembered in that place; and bone fractures are known by how the eye is twisted, widely open at one end, and pressed against the palm of the hand; and when there is no twisting or touching pain, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no breakage; but it can have a curvature, crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	s noce t2; (C:
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fracture which is in elevation, and the two parts are disjointed, they must now be set equally straight, so that if an abscess comes there, it does come along; and if an abscess clears, leave no day until the abscess has been calmed; then set it evenly to a movement you can easily and healthily make, and know that the restoration of it is easier than those where pieces are present; then straighten, as it should be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if they extend to two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or from your arm where it is a small limb, or with cords, or one cord and your hand; then set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb have been separated, reset them by all means into their places for movements you can make easily, and ensure in your work there comes no injury or pain to the patient; and arrange well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems not rightly: then dress it neatly and do not bind or press too tightly as those who often cause abscesses and member constriction through their work; we have seen this many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is at risk, chasten the patient well so that it does not move, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, or in any other manner; and ensure the limb is secure enough that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when it feels no pain, it is not at risk, and you should place it in a neutral position so that it does not feel any pain; and be careful to ensure it is placed correctly, lest twists occur when restored; the quality of the broken limb depends on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Aches that the broken limbs are of various kinds, small and large, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For it has small members, such as arms and legs: you should wrap them with soft and delicate linen cloths; for larger ones like thighs and legs: you should use a wide and sturcuint cord, because the wide cords encompass the entire large limb evenly without any slippage; then place light padding around it, III or IV turns depending on the member, and secure your hand to the whole cord, then move up above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture moves slightly away from the break; and loosen the cord gradually until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take another cord, and wrap neatly around the broken area again; then return to the part below the fracture, and tighten it moderately, not too hard or too soft as we have said in the first instruction above; then place linen or cloth pads between the cords evenly, then put all together with a bandage, and finally attach well-made straps on top. If there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 If there is swelling or an abscess, apply a soothing ointment for the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days; then secure with bandages, using strips of broad leather neatly cut, or wood shavings, according to this pattern:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But it is necessary that the strapping put on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others; and as long as needed for small or large limbs; then secure with bandages in the same manner as you did for the first ligature, then tie a string promptly, just as in the first ligature above the fracture; tighter at one end. Less tight is more effective; and it should be that the string is medium strength, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax linen. For if the string is too thick, as seen from men who make their rope-cord from twisted flax fibers, it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be equal if it's too fine, and must not have less than two finger width between each bandage.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the nails after straightening them into healthy ones, then apply linen patches or rag cloth underneamoors, so that they do not loosen.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not matter to extract all fragments from fractured limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 When the limb is large, it does not require putting on splints unless after 2 or 7 days, or more depending on the certainty of a hot abscess occurring; and here are the ways of old masters to restore broken bones, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stands against the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg whites, make this mixture not too clear nor too thick, use it, and this is the common method for splints restoring broken bones in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of making a plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take pine resin and yarrow and onion, an ounce; myrrh and aloes, two ounces; alum seven ounces; and make it into powder, adding honey with egg whites. If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones, effective for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another way to make splints for twists: take mugwort and yarrow, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 9 parts; acacia in vinegar or egg whites, 6 parts; bolus Armeniac with wine, 10 parts, grind well, mix with water or plenty of egg whites, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to stabilize joints and bones removed from their places relieves the pain occurring, and those who cut the bone use new bandages, and fractures: take fresh linen, and the flour mixed with oil and cooked, and apply on top of it.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These bandages do not restore, but they are good to soothe hot abscesses and properly alleviate pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for setting broken bones: take dry leaves of fig trees and ground ivy, and grind them together to make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way of bandaging for the healing of bone fractures and to remove the remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of wormwood, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, from each part; and grind it, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply with wet coriander water or simply water, and that's how to use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way to splint more firmly than the first, when an abscess is ready for limb restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of valerian and flaxseed, balm, honeywort, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them up, then mix with saltwater or fresh water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb to restore its strength, but only wax mixed with oil, and nothing else; he states it should be neither too hard nor too soft between two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen believes one should apply dry and slightly warm substances to a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, olive oil, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method for treating wounds and pain: take mugwort and henbane leaves, or bird feathers, and yarrow; grind them equally, and pound into a paste to apply as a poultice.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then loosen a bit afterward and ensure the patient feels no pain or has moved any bone from its place; if not removed recently, do so gently by hand. If pain comes to the site, or itching, feeling of restlessness, or swelling occurs, hurry up and remove it, take off the splint now; take a light cloth and wet sponge, dip in water, and lift the limb until itching stops and pain is alleviated. Let the member rest for an hour, then wrap with dry bandage moistened with water or oil roseate, and bound to a nut (bandage) as long as you are sure of no heat from inflammation; thus relieve the inflammation in the limb, ease the pain, and resume delicate wrapping, adding more splinting but not too tightly; continue with such until it is fully healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and warmth and pain and swelling indicate bone involvement throughout, and you need plaster and bandages to do so again as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 If there is nothing in the limb as we have said, then reset it not until after III days or IIII or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days, according to what one sees, until the breaker heals, and brings the shoulder joint close together again; then once more tighten it more than first, and let the flesh swell as I have said before; and if you see that the place is drying more than necessary, know that no new bruising will occur; so thereafter apply warm water frequently whenever you reset it, and do this each day, and wash gently. In this way reduce the bruising in the limb, and quickly relieve what the wise doctor does, who returns the joint properly: this is bad, and such practices are fearsome, and I see nothing else but harm and proper treatment.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 There are many ways to break bones and various shapes, and the causes are different; for there are breaks caused by sword blows, where the entire bone is shattered up to the joint below it, as if made with an axe or club; therefore this type of fracture is called "haichure.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing it, this manner of "absolute" fracture occurs; and there is a wound from these two great or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impacted break, or fracture, or stone chip, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a hanging fracture, which reaches up to the tissue just below the bone, or it is above the bnose and is this wound great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that heals in the bone as delicate as hair follicles, and it is a small fracture, therefore this type of breakage is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by being struck with a stone or falling or similar thing, causing the piece of bone to protrude, and the eye sockets are shaped as when glassblowers blow into their pipes; these pieces lie within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 This occurs more often in those who have wet bones, like children's heads; and it happens with all types of fractures where small pieces are dislodged as described; and I will speak about them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of fractures through dislocation above them, and examination with probing fingers, and by the corrupt cartilage found thereupon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is known when the bone has been uncovered, and rubbed black above it if there is an open fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	by the them (S cijd. So much and, t so far a m
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	When you do not see an unstable fracture or expect healing, begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the pain comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day of the moon that you can see, remove the bone in front.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is so situated, hurry to remove the bone within seven days, as long as the tissue underneath the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the bone fracture reaches near the cloth covering the brain, you must split the fractured part as follows: and ensure that you expose the head injured by the patient's pain, revealing the bone in all ways possible beneath the wound'tissue, and apply a gentler pressure where feasible; if blood seepage occurs during exposure of the bone or abscesses arise, provide assistance as necessary. It is that you fill the cavity with washed gauze soaked in oil roseate; allow the wound to rest until the abscesses are eased and be sure there's no further blood seepage; then begin removing around the bone according to treatment methods: one method involves cutting at a narrow opening from the front, resembling its shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various cuts of different widths - some narrow and others wide, sharp at one end and flat at another, made of iron wire; and work gently so as not to nick the skull.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is out of place and hardened, it must be that you pierce around it, thus fitting in splints with tongs, not too far so they don't penetrate beyond the outer bone; there should be a margin or circle above the tip, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; thus you will have several, each coming into its place on the edge of the bone, with tongs for all tests. And this is the form of the three ways of tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place one tongs on the beam, and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tongs a little bit afterward, doing this all around, then measure with incisors the space of the bone between the punctures, making it as finely as possible, lightly, as we have said, to trace out the bone with your hand or any of the instruments you have like pincers; and be sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have felt the bone and drawn it out, it is necessary to address the readiness that has been delayed from the bone by any instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more careful and subtle than other chisels; if there remains nothing of small bones or scales, gently move with instruments as we have mentioned. Then care for the wound by stitches and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is this which the Greeks call it, and it is more beneficial; and he holds it very strongly, and that's my opinion.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose part of the bone, at which the fracture opens up; and when you have exposed that part, then place on top of the head of this crescent-shaped instrument, of which here is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut too deeply, and it is the agitated part in two ribs, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet underneath, to gently chop the entire bone without harming the surrounding tissue; if it's close to the bone, gently work on the bone as there is no damage or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate through to the skin and is cut only from above, with small fragments remaining; then address the roughness afterward, and use a subtle file to remove scales at each location, using various quantities for optimal treatment based on the work and nature of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter large boils, then proceed with more subtle ones, and continue until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In the case of any fine hair cutting and delicate fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its specific nature; this is not easily restored in those who have devoted themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the socket is exposed, it is fitting that you sew a linen bandage according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten with oil rose-colored, and place upon the wound; then take another bandage folded twice or thrice, and moisten with wine and oil rose-colored, and place upon the first bandage; and do this as lightly as you can so as not to burden the socket, then treat above the other joint, without straining it more than necessary until it only touches the wound; leave in such state for one or two days, until the swelling is calmed, then remove it, and apply medicines like roots of lily, flour of mugwort, powdered incense, aristology, and similar things; from these make a powder, place upon the wound, and apply other medicines without biting; ensure that the wound remains clean without leaving ointment or causing swelling with bandage, for when bone assembles under the linen of the brain, it becomes hardened and strained, leading to great harm; because when a sharp thing is placed on the socket, numbness spreads above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Thus take heed, if by any chance something happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if only blackness comes from the medicine applied, to ensure its efficacy, you must take a part of honey, and three parts rose oil and mix it with a linen cloth; then apply it to the wound; then treat according to the necessary methods until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	; a.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must tie your little finger or thumb into a bandage and insert the break similarly in your index finger, and towards the base by nature; do this gently so that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is on the part above the nose and the thumb cannot be placed at its place, you should slightly enlarge the head of a saw to make room for it.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, repeat this process; try to restore it by the first day if you can; if not, after seven or a similar time when the swelling subsides, then tie bandages of linen cloths on the fingertips where the break is located.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And in similar semblable, ou tres-so est isnt les de. Sime the untie, ith: li cauter que en l'artempe thee of bone est desor, ce tissiez d’elles le se, la cousts and soi ores le chis.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And a certain restorer said that one must pluck out all hairs in their twenties, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem to me that this is quite right, but it should be plucked in the making of an ointment of egg and flour powder; then let the hair grow until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use goose feathers in place of threads, and if there is an eggshell fragment nearby, and it causes a breakage, then bring relief to the patient by blowing away. Do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes while working on the patient, put some greased wool or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little bit of diacron.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there are no abscesses present, then apply a paste made of wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg ointment; then place it on light gauze, without binding tightly; and if the break from nails is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract as appropriate for such cases, then cut the fissure, and cure using suitable methods like plasters and ointments for this condition; and if there are no internal wounds in the nails, treat with tents and linen soaks until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the displacement of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound, the fracture is slight, as it does not involve bones breaking apart easily, if one can feel gaps internally.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right part, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand, gently feel inside the fracture, and guide it with the other hand carefully, enscribing them.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	After 96. Why they:
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If the dislocations of the teeth occur, or jarring, then they are strained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put on a fractured mandible cerote, and place over it a double cloth; then place a large well-made stone under the cloth according to the size of the mandible, and measure as much movement that you can allow, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, relocate it by the next day, and then put back what is changing; place a poultice on top, with finely ground flour or wheat bran powder after you have removed the cerote; place a light linen over the poultcuie, and if the poultuce swells, ensure the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come up, treat as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no piece of bone has been extracted; carefully extract the fragment from the surrounding tissues with this instrument.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it using a flap according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces of bone, and it does not remain in place, if the wound is wide, then apply on top .i. splints with straps to immobilize it, until it heals properly.
de la forcele	the; O's.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The powerful breaks many times before the shoulder, and the breakage occurs in three ways: where it is broken and separated into two, and also has pieces, and is easier to restore; or there is a break with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when there is a break with an accompanying wound, so that you have two assistants; one washes the dislocated shoulder where the powerful break occurred; and the other extends the neck toward the affected part; then place the break evenly on both hands, ensuring proper alignment without any bulging or jutting.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if further extension is needed, place under the shoulder of the patient a round rod made of cloth or linen and thick according to your necessity; stretch and lift the powerful break, holding the rod with one hand, ensuring proper alignment as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you cannot draw the head of the dislocation to its proper place because it comes from far away, then have the patient lie on their stomach and insert half an ounce earring under the shoulder blade, pushing the ministers down the back until the bone of the dislocated joint is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then approach the fracture with your hands, and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut into them. Carefully remove the pieces of bone, and if they cannot be joined by any means, use one of the instruments you have prepared; but place this instrument under the dislocation for safety.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 It appears like a spoon, and is not sharp at the tip, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the work; it has two heads, as you see, one head being wider, and the other thinner, following the direction of the wound made when you have set the bones; and once you are sure about a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the incision is small or you suspect an infected abscess, seal the wound with linen and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when abscesses come out, if pus is present, apply linen soaked in rose oil and alcohol and wine, and put on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The tension of the bone, when it is without wounds and cracks, is to apply powdered pound of molten lime and egg yolk on the bone, then place light plasters over it; then take a very large band about one palm wide, then double up a cloth under the plasters with the mixture; then take a delicate taper made from three fingers wide and long, wrapping it around that band so its head is hanging; and put the taper on the fracture, turning the band over the neck, and across the good shoulder, and across the bad shoulder. Combine each part, and when you see that the fracture holds the plasters securely, reward each day, and when the ligaments loosen, keep them strained; have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the arm for lifting the shoulders upwards; this will relieve the strength of the bone by supporting the shoulder, or if you bind the arm to the neck, do not untie it unless an unwanted incident occurs, until X days have passed; then restart the plasters if needed and keep them strained like that until fully restored; it is usually restored in at most 28 days, but less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Regarding a shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 Sometimes the shoulder is broken or dislocated, and it cannot be moved without force; if it appears damaged, set it according to its fracture pattern, and relocate according to its natural shape in all possible ways; then place on the area powder of ground molasses with abundant oil, and light bandages, and put under a double cloth; then place under a wide and fine stretcher, slightly wider than the shoulder, ensuring no slackness at the edges where the shoulder meets the stretcher, so that you sew hemp linen evenly; and then strain with a large bandage firmly, so that the stretcher does not move from its place, and observe the joint every day; and each time it is painful, re-strain, and adjust the stretcher if necessary. When these numbers are complete, release, but be cautious because it's not bone that heals easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes without breaking the skin, treat it gently, as we have discussed in our section on easing abscesses with heat.
de la brisure dou pis	Of healing broken legs.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The flesh is sometimes broken in many places, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks when neglected.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken within, if you lower it incorrectly, the patient feels great pain, and lacks support, and swelling, and sometimes expels blood, and cracks appear in the broken bones, and he feels very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is to have the patient lie on their back, placing a pillow between the shoulders, then pressing the shoulder blades and bringing together the ribs with both hands, carefully ensuring all limbs are positioned equally as necessary until the bone structure appears correctly; next apply splints and padding over the fracture subtly using salt or another light substance, wrapping it in a cloth so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its round shape on the back, stretching gently and releasing every hour as it heals, and continue if it becomes more relaxed; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or itchiness at the site, pain, or pus, do so quickly, then apply a remedy using various methods of care; afterward, reset the splint and keep it stretched until healthy.
de la brisure des costes	For rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	For if the incisions are often found on the back, and it is severe painful to remove them, and they must be inspected closely like that there may not heal; for infection should be examined carefully by physicians of wounds or other such cases when sus lissoie de la pus.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the repair is such that you align the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then put on a splint, and bind with a stake if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is descending into the interior, causing great pain and numbness to the patient as with pleurisy, for the bone lacks flesh; it has many nicks, and brings up much blood vomitus, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have applied significant remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And from those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to push the fracture forward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not advise creating wounds when there are pus-filled abscesses present unless they have already occurred.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have occurred, then treat them accordingly.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that applying cups on the body to draw out humors is reasonable, although there is doubt that these cups may attract excess fluids due to weakness in the body's positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	as many not so that the following them: ichoont read f (and they are all; a certaineckse contley line.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels such great pain that they cannot bear by the bone touching the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then one must fissure at the location of the broken rib, and it is necessary to use a tool for protection; then you must cut the bone, gently extract, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and heal with splints until well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If abscesses are present, place the moistened cloths with rose oil over them; and position it properly where it should be for an abscess, ensuring they lie on their side along the ribcage as needed until they heal.
de la brisure dou col	Of a broken rib
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a fractured bone of the ribcage, and it is possible that it may bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this occurs in anyone, and you wish to know if it will heal or not, take care if you see their hands become softened and swollen and cold, and cannot move them or stretch them out, and when you prick with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that they have certain mortal conditions, and if you move them and they feel well when restrained properly, know that the bone joint is safe, and the patient will be healed if proper care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 If similar things occur in the spine of the back, and you need to know if it is sane or not, take care if the joints are softened, and if there are accidents that have taken hold, and on top of the back jumps a violent wind and egestion without willingness; and when it has been soaked in its belly, it also jumps an egestion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if after being soaked on the back he wants to rise, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Say that it is fatal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this incident does not occur, then the matter is more lightweight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply if there is an abscess heat, then put oil of roses or olive oil on the spine until it is soothed; then place it under one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it must be set under the head; then remove the bone, and join the two edges of the wound with a stitch, if they are large, until healed; and if the bone's head is broken, known as "the skull fracture," put your pouch in your left hand, and balance it equal to your right hand, then place the plaster and bandage on top, if needed; then bind it, and if there are any dislocated bones, mend them, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For a broken hipbone fracture, apply treatment to stabilize the area; use splints or plasters for support if necessary, and provide pain relief using appropriate methods as per medical knowledge of that time.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there's not a slight reduction at its head; and they make long cuts, sloping to the sole, coming in pain at the place, and swelling as though broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And for the restoration, extend your hand over it until you are above the break; and determine which bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, make it even with that break so it can be in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or slopes to the sole, make the patient lie on their belly until the restoration of that break is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have set it evenly, place under the plaster, then place on a wooden or metal pillar and strain the breakage so that it does not move; and wrap with linen from below the ribs until it is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided; and then follow what we have previously mentioned; and afterward proceed with restoration, and strain as necessary, unless there is any complication; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are those which lie between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, then one must be repaired according to one of the two ways; that is, take a piece of plain wood as an splint, in this manner.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulders with two ligaments, and place the patient under one of them; then pour blood over the broken bone on the splint until it reaches halfway, and have a crook made from wood, then rest it under any heavy object or extenders provided by attendants; then set the fracture equally between his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	the t; and the cont that b
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is further out, restrain the sinews from below the rupture, and on the rupture, and extend each of the members to its share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 If the fracture is near the shoulder blade, you must place a bandage under the elbow and another on the arm below the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the forearm, it requires placing a light bandage without much strain until the fracture lines up above its location and along the forearm; then align the fracture as necessary, and fasten, unless an abscess occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses occur, do not restrain them for more than six days and apply a cloth with ease and oil roseate until the abscess is soothed; then secure it, and the manner of securing should be such that you place an embossment over the break, then bring the arm close to the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; wrap it up and restrain above the joint as well as the arm until it is steadily aligned, unless anything prevents this or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use restraints and place a larger and stronger than others, and each pinçaints of which are iii degrees of space entre parts; then secure it so on top, as many espleure .i. Then above the break is more less than aligne de, and after chapter so that ii of which of them up inchement auaint dement, and of chapiste, plus forment to be of:
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see a swelling of the hairs and strain as we have said, in the hour when you restore the fractured limb, and doubt whether an abscess is hot, let it lie with bandages until the seventh day as we have said; then check each three days for the bandage, ensuring no irritation or swelling occurs at its location, or that new growth cannot reach the member because it is too strained.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the dislocation, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 If no such incidents occur, do not dislocate until after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on their back, with hands over their stomach; and place I cushion made evenly of plain wool under the shoulder, and observe each hour of the day or night to ensure that the fractured member does not move or is not softened by the ligaments. If necessary due to the power of medicine, give them the flesh as we have previously instructed; and when it begins to heal, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in forty days altogether; and then you must dislocate them again and administer baths and ointment treatments to set it right.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 If the stricture is ugly and bent, it lingers for dislocation of days or months two.
de la brisure du bras	For a broken arm fracture:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "ulna" and the "radius," with one being small, which supports the forearm; and the other large, located below it towards the elbow joint; sometimes just the large ulna or radius is broken, or both together at times.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small vessels are broken, restoration is easy, and healing; when the large ones are broken, then the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it's only the small vessels that are broken, then a little extension and equalizing is needed.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it's the large vessels that are broken, then stronger extension is needed; extend above one finger, and raise the palm of the hand higher than others, while the small fingers lie lower than other fingers, with crossed hands over him exactly, and another finger raised more high in front so he does not suffer any strain. Then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand or at a ligament, while another minister extends it above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place the mirror equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, place each one back to its proper position; and if any are dislocated that prick at their corners, do not restore them to their original location, but elevate and bind with a splint as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a break accompanied by a wound, I advise the surgeon to take care of it individually.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if at the beginning of restoration an abscess occurs, use a bandage made of rosin oil and white wax, so that it is not too hard or soft; place the bandage gently over the abscesses until they are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the cast, and place the plaster of mill powder with plenty of egg, then apply the splints, and let them be stronger and wider than the others; ensure that there are VI splints or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or in II; strain more on the breakage than elsewhere, and every day less so as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the linens above the fracture be soft and moist, not too rough; and use filaments from flax that are neither too thick nor thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And return the member and the ligament after certain days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any accident comes to the member, like itching that comes to the member, you must wash the member with warm water until the itchiness is soothed; and let the member not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones displaced, along with similar things, apply a dressing.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a little and let it rest for some days until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not reset the dislocation until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 or if it is entailed, then place the hands on his neck, and they are equal; beware of movement and digestion, and sleep on your back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and sometimes in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It is said that at the back of the hand where the tendons are, fractures occur frequently and not just bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged in front of him equally; then place his hand on a stretched table, and extend the ministers' bones that are broken, and align them evenly until they are well joined; and apply plaster and stuffing, unless abscesses occur, then he puts a splint according to the quantity thereof; and it should be wrapped in .i. cloth of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is near the forehead within the plant of the abdomen, make a splint from linen cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their broken rib; then strain with a long strip of cloth, ensuring its height is as tall as the palm's length, and continue to apply pressure as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the lower part (possibly referring to the jaw), it must be that you place a splint above and below it on either side so the hand remains open and straight, then wrap entirely around the hand, ensuring the ligament between them is securely held.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of your fingers (possibly referring to a finger), if it's a sprain, position them equally as needed; and strain with the palm, and if you see that putting on a small straight splint helps elevate the injury without movement. If the fracture occurs at other joints like the index or another one of the fingers, place them equally, and bind with the healthy finger that is afterward; or bind all together in such way as to allow some movement, or you may put on a splint if needed (possibly referring to padding), as I have instructed. Be mindful in the care for healing wounds and preparing for abscess drainage, and treat any bleeding that occurs as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see when it twists forward and backward; and its restoration consists in tying a ligature above the fracture and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb equally with its corresponding side; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is near the root of the thigh, let one ligament be toward the wrist and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And similarly if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be beside the knee and then the extension below; next hold the bone evenly with both hands as in its natural form, and then apply a splint, ensuring no pus forms thereafter.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess present, allow it to be soothed and then return to your work and treatment; the lithotomy is done in part fashion.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary to wrap around the fracture two bandages folded in three or four layers and leaving excess material; then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, above it; then again twist the leg and thigh with the bandage and place an iron nail at the fracture site; next fill the gap between the leg and thigh with soft fabric to ensure equal pressure, and begin tying three or four turns around the fracture. As you move further up from the fracture, reduce the tightness; then go back to the two holes in the thread that was tied between the leg and thigh, and add three wedges above it; then return to below the heel of the thread until you reach near the foot; if it is securely held in place, leave it as such, but if there are no signs of pus or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it occurs and is dislocated as described many times before, if there are pieces of bone that protrude, one should pull them out if possible; and if not, the opening must be cut, and a hook used to extract them; then treat as we have said until healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	On occasion the thigh is broken as in a shoulder or arm; however, when such restoration is done, it does not deceive the sickly person.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Be aware that the thigh may be restored in one day or less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove under the knee cap
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 In the groin area, there are few breaks but it often bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it's not necessarily a crack or piercing, but leads to all wounds, feels like a wound, and this is quite unpleasant.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that you put what was torn back to its place so it can move freely; then apply the cast, and if needed, use a round splint, and strain as necessary, followed by all the arrangements we have mentioned for other types of breaks such as abscesses and similar issues; then address each accident with whatever is appropriate until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	les journef:
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 There are two bones in the leg; one is called "gastrocnemius" and the other is called "tibia"; various fractures occur as they do in the arm, and thus restoration is performed similarly to that of the arm entirely, and the procedures are all there. And if both bones break together, the entire leg turns at once.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, it causes significant pain and swelling can be seen; and it becomes deformed.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then make the extension and set it straight, and secure the ligaments evenly; however, if there is unsightly fracture, and there are several fragments, let the extension be minor and easier; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your treatment, take two strips of stiffened wood measuring the length of the leg from one end to the other and wrap them once around above and below, securing in the middle as well, so that the leg may not bend to the right or left, thus it is good; and none administer a long bandage if made of wood, positioning the leg forward to restrict movement, properly applied at the fracture site where there is an injury; each day move the leg to check for bleeding or other incidents, cure until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Regarding a broken bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bones of the foot it comes to a fracture and the small bones, and nothing occurs that causes dislocation or other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture at the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding on top of each groove, place your feet where the bones are elevated, then press until they return to their original position; then apply an embalmment and dressings over it, and put a small padded bandage with two flat buttons underneath, then bind it firmly for support, after which you have enveloped with cloths around.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the ligament, for you will find the bones equal again, either broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any broken bones, then repair them as we have said for the hand of a man; then put a splint on the broken bone according to its length and width, then place a table under it as I mentioned earlier, and stretch it immediately; and if there are two or three or more, break each one with a splint according to its size, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and strapped beneath the foot of the table so that they hang below the belly.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is important not to forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each injury as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman is broken, and she must lie in bed, then tilt her towards her back side, and have support behind her; then fill the bladder with cotton as much as you can put in; then make her stand up gradually and gradually lift her back, and once the cotton reaches the entrance of the nature (vagina), it restores the bone along with the cotton; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, restore it, so that for seven days or until restored: if done correctly, the fracture will be healed, and if you see signs of infection, take a sheep blad지 and tie a rag around its opening; then fill the whole bladder into the nature. Blow through the rag formely, as long as the bladder is emptied inside: the nature will restore the fracture; then it must be filled with cotton again, and left for several days until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 When the bone of the arm's knuckle is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said with the hipbone; and these recent fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and use to this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For a break indicates various approaches to restoration: thus, it is then determined.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	And so the les apres de l’entement, soit la brissoie les arriere prenemonts est quide qui ie la porte aulees que li maintes. Quant le reste les. Enfors entor, et ce quittre doree oinment puis ne i les. And soi:
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those who have a fracture with a wound, particularly if the bone of the hip or shoulder resembles one, they should be made whole again; and let the ligaments that we mentioned testify to their healing.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, then begin healing from lead poisoning at that same hour or day, unless there are other issues; proceed to restore the fracture in the meantam hour or day, if there's no abscess present.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	the most of that you noe:t; it a: nd: sockets; do not said c and they what ICE d.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the knee, it must be gently aligned with your hands in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension cannot be made to align with your hands, then use this instrument of iron which is .viij. or .vij. long inches, and its width according to the amount of wound; and it is necessary for the barber that he grasps .iii. or iiij., as needed in each bone-setting procedure; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not fold when compressing the limb during your operation, with a wider part forward:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palanching", so that the patient's head must be placed under the visible part of the bone; and the bandage should be done once, until it heals, making both sides equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle and the fractures cannot properly grip the bone, it is necessary to cut off the head of the bone until the fragments can be held.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, use the cap of an appropriate instrument for this purpose, either incising or sawing; then remove whatever is lodged within the sharply pointed and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, believe that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If you have done so that it is in its place, then moisten the dressing with vin stipticus (medieval term for astringents like witch hazel) black and properly saturated; and do not apply anything but oil to the wound, as this will prevent putrefaction and decay. Then provide linens after restoring the bone, leaving the wound exposed, covering the entire area according to the size of the wound, enspectively that you care well it is not strained with a break; many times have healers done this, resulting in good or bad outcomes for the patient. The tightening should be softer and easier than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 If the wound is large or bad, and you suspect that a foul event may occur, as we have said, and there is pain at the site, then do not put anything directly on it; but wrap around it with durable cloths and bandage them in place.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And if after one or two days you see that pus has emerged in the wound, and whatever you have applied there has worked, then apply healing salve to the wound, as a tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary to equip the limb with a splint so that the bowel moves lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if more than one day passes, and it cannot be made loose again but continues to dislocate like this because there are small bone fragments, so you must dress the wound with gauze, and remove all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula comes to the site, or another form of decay, then it must be treated as described in this chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and exposed above the limb, like the hip or shoulder bones, as well as similar large body parts, do not attempt to treat it yourself, for many times this leads to death, but let it heal until it hardens; perhaps in XYZ days or longer, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises that come from the ulceration
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the ulceration, especially when it is near the joint, and an unsightly thing is to see the deformation of the limb; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Be careful then if the bone is still fresh: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, frankincense, and other similar things, and select none or all of these, and mix them with astringent wine, abundant oil or olive juice; and place it in slices, and press well without loosening daily, then remove and start anew on another piece until the swelling subsides; or bind over a suitably made plank; for its property is that it draws out all excess fluids from the limbs; and if the swelling has turned as hard as stone and needs to be removed, cover with bandages, reduce the surplus flesh; then take it to a barber until it is dried.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and remains weak and delicate afterward due to various causes: one because it was bound too tightly and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many bindings that prevented normal movement in the limb; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of large movements, not within its time; or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to have the patient eat well and keep their body limber until there are multiple veins in them; and administer baths, bringing joy and comfort; then apply plaster to the member so that it draws significant nourishment into it, and often wash with warm water until nourishment returns to the member; and let it return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After illness, the limb becomes distorted
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	After illness, the limb becomes twisted again after healing, and bones are severely broken, and the form of the limb is ugly; however, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that a completely new member must be created, and many foolish men have done so in our land; such practices are blameworthy, leading to great harm, and sometimes death. However, if the dislocations and twists are recent, it is fitting to treat them with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked, like valerian leaves, roots, poppy seeds, and similar things; and a one-week poultice, such as well-made diaquilon, and take the musk root of valerian, and mix it with geese fat or oil of sesame, and apply the poultice. Or take fig gums, and grind them with fennel seed, and similar medicines that alleviate stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And at no time is there an inflammation of bone through continuous and lengthy rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And administer movements to each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted and hardened vein is like a stone, it must be removed with a knife, as far down to the bone as needed, using a delicate sharp blade; then apply poultice and pay attention to its treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This book begins with dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, now it is necessary to return carefully without force.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 If it is delayed and the lobe swells, and by chance you reset it with little pain; therefore do not move it until it has swelled: many times this brings honeydew and other pains; however, when this occurs, treat the patient well, then leave them alone until the abscess heads are soothed; then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset, and tend to each member as needed based on where the treatment will be applied.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	by ous la*
des mandibules	Of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones become dislocated and remain out of place; there are two ways in which this occurs: either they have moved slightly from their position and softened a bit, or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, causing saliva to escape from the mouth that it cannot contain, preventing them from closing their mouths, and wrapping their tongues with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is minor, it may return to various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is complete and fulfilled, then you must quickly reset it without pressure; in such a manner that the treatment ointment touches the patient's head, and pour two drops from one of its hands into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation involves both parts; with the other hand they should be balanced; command the patient to soften their jawbones and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The minister places the mirror so that it is level, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the return is difficult, especially when both mandibles are together, use warm water and oil to gently move them; do not force the movement as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 When they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient is healed well and feels softer, then place on muslin cloths made with a mixture of oil roses and wax; then lightly bind them with soft bands; let the patient sleep on their back, and their heads be between two pillows, so they do not move neither to the right nor left, nor strain themselves but gently chew meat until pains are gone, and the jawbones are fully healed and healthy. Then provide whatever they desire lightly, without forcing them to open their mouths for eating or drinking, until the mandibles are well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two lower jaws cannot be returned to their place within an hour and are not properly aligned again, fever and usual colds may occur, and possibly gastrointestinal discharge, or possibly pure bile is vomited.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then declare that it is a fatal condition; and many times death occurs within seven days for those affected by it.
de la forcelle	From the spleen
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot be dislocated within the ribs without also affecting it and its neighbor, and it is never dislocated by chance, as one feels well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 The restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then firmly press the joint with your palm until it returns; then place a splint and bandage over it, and secure it; and the shoulder blade which is towards the course of the arm cannot dislocate again; if not possible, or if it dislocates once more, as we have said, you must reset it to its original position; then apply a splint and bandage, and ensure stability for the patient until they are well; similarly, return the shoulder blade to its place when displaced from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 He says that the shoulder dislocates in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the hip joint below; and the second is towards the lower end of the arm; sometimes it dislocs upwards but this rarely happens; and does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; often dislocating downwards toward the hip, especially in those with little strength as they do so swiftly; for those with adequate strength, it occurs slowly and returns quickly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes this happens to certain men with knocks or fractures, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, believing it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must examine it thoroughly until certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that when the dislocation moves towards the joint, there is a difference between the affected and healthy shoulder, and you will find their diversity manifest; and at the top of the shoulder blade, you will find a hollow, just below the joint where it connects to the collarbone, as if they were eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place nor move in any way. And similarly, if dislocated upwards, it is not hidden but can be clearly discerned at the connection point; this type of dislocation cannot simply be reset when new or when a child feels ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then places his fingers below the elbow and lifts the joint with force to its proper place; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, placing it back underneath so swiftly it will return.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; they should be anointed with a softening and soothing substance, such as an infusion of elderflower, fennel, and honey in water, and applied. Then let them lie on their back, placing a bandage of equal thickness that is not too soft nor too hard under the shoulder, then place your hands atop the talon, gently lift the spine of the shoulder, and treat the hand tenderly; another minister applies something to stiffen the top of the affected arm, so it does not move downwards. The shoulder returns immediately in this manner: and make present a man who is taller than the patient; he should face them directly, place his shoulder under theirs, lift it upward, so that they hang like an arrowhead, then another minister treats the hand gently towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 If the patient is too light, place something heavy with him, and the dislocation recurs now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And the resetting is done in another way: and it is as if one drives a long stake into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder may return to its place just like a pistil, neither too large nor too thick; then it should be placed under the patient, but with cloths beneath for protection; and the patient's hand stretched out on the other side properly. The joint will soon return to its original position; and if it does not return despite all these measures we have mentioned, proceed as follows: take a stake of two feet in length and four inches wide, which has the head made for entering by the middle from one side according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the forearm wrapped in cloth so it does not hurt the patient, then place under the seat of the affected person; extend out arms above the length of the limb, and tie the shoulder to the forearm, with the arm at the head end, then move the arm onto a wide stool's slat, let hands fall backward, leaving the body hanging on one side: now hold the joint in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in any manner, if you must place under the seat a woolen spindle of equal length, then apply the instrument with powdered substance from the mill, including incense and egg's ash, on all around the shoulder, then strain immediately off the seat, turning the joint over the instrument, and wrap the hand at its collar, keeping hands in place like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he fasts so long as the limb is comforted, for then it will cure faster; and after 5 or 6 days thereafter, move it; and if it becomes firm and does not soften, then it is well-healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture that has occurred or another reason, you must apply three punctures with cautery as described in this chapter on cautery treatments.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it remains dislocated after six days, and the joint does not hold or can lift either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the back and hips is caused by impact, and extension of hands, and you provide another remedy; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and delays in movement, it is often used by the patient many times until those stiffnesses are alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the elbow joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	One should say that the elbow joint is dislocated at two ends and returns to both; if it's completely dislocated in all parts, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not repositioned because one can see it well and feel it; and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you align the affected joint with its proper position, if it appears openly visible.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is necessary to reset it as soon as abscesses arise, for if they come about, it would be difficult to reset them; and at times not all can be reset fully, especially when they are in the rear; these are worse than other dislocations, cause more pain, and possibly result in death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	The restoration is such that when it can be reset, extend its hand to your two hands; and spread the arms wide, and the fingers according to the cautery around, above, and below, and position the joints together or at the base of the palm until they return to their place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	When the dislocation is at the front, it returns as it folds its hand onto itself, with the root of the palm's keel that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and two attendants extend the arm, and wrap them with a double long and wide cloth; then turn the arm from each side; and when you have enveloped it in a cloth, pour oil on any part of the joint to soften it, then press firmly until it returns; and once it is back in place, apply dry embalmment with egg white, stretch strongly, and straighten the arm against the painful side, leaving it for several days before releasing.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly in place, release the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, reapply the olive oil and the bandage, leaving it for some days until it is securely fixed; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if after resetting the joint it feels unstable and moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is relieved; or place a fat sheep grease on the joint, then leave for a day and a night, then reset, and let him take a bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint thoroughly, then put the grease back on, and have him bathe again; do this twice or three times until it is well-adjusted; if you see, place moist chaff with melted butter over it and strain.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint dislocates and the return is light compared to other joints; it must be hastily returned to its place at the same hour as it dislocates, so that it swells or becomes hot like a boil.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 The realignments are that you place the patient's hand on a table, and extend their fingers, and measure them equally, so they put their palm over the joint appearance, and hold it until it returns to its normal position; then you must ensure it is properly aligned before placing the back of their hand on an extended table for realignment.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a tabletop and the master fixes his hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, that's good. But if not, apply the pressure of soothing stones and let them be in such a way to begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if it cannot be endured, and you are unable to place it back in its proper position after any days, for the joint remains twisted; nor can anything move the fingers without moisture, or grasp any object at all: then understand that the nerves are cut, or arteries; there is no other remedy but to apply cauterization near the area and perhaps nothing else will suffice.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put on the plaster as we have said, then strain and leave for 5 days, then release and keep so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no cracking sound, with warm water lather, and rub until clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the displacement of fingers on the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Never are the two bones of the hand dislocated to either side, never from the back of the palm or the belly; then they become unstable, and cause a dislocation in your fingers as it happens, then support the head of the thumb, and push toward the part where it is dislocated; leave for three days, and then make it level again on that day; and bind it once more, as we have said, with a daily bandage, and loosen it to move, and re-bandage; do this often, until it becomes tight, and do likewise if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is set right; and similarly proceed when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	From dysfunction of the spinal column of the back, two disorders arise: one of pain and stiffness.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spinal column of the back or neck is dislocated and there are several dislocations, if there is no remedy, it swiftly harms the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are that urine flows without voluntary control, and cannot be held, and many times limbs become weakened, or knees, or one of the two arms or legs; often the spinal column slips in four parts; those where it slips towards the back are called "gilbositez": the treatment is that you must strengthen oneself if gilbositez has occurred since childhood; there is no cure nor healing for it entirely.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, according to ancient methods of treatment with many words, there is no great benefit; but I have simplified it according to my intention and created remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 In the swelling that occurs on the thighs in front, there is neither cure nor health; and similarly those that occur directly on the sides, which cannot be treated except for those properly on the back as I say; and it is so that the patient should lie face up flatly even, with strain from below without bending; then place a hot iron at the head neatly into the earth, and another at the feet, and tie a band above the affected area of the malady, and another around the calves, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the bands, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the two irons; and they are well fastened as we have said, with the patient's palms placed firmly on his spine, until he awakens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If it does not return with this treatment, take a stick three arm lengths long, and lifted from behind the appearance, place the patient on their side, position the head of the stick under the appearance, then insert the middle of the stick along the spine; place the ends of the stick against the opposite end of the appearance, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, make the hooks at the other end turn towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And you shall insert two sticks under the head of one arm's width on each side and between them from top to bottom, an inch wide; within each stick, there should be holes or pegs that align correctly, and they must be firmly secured so they do not move; between every two sticks, there should be a turning stick for the hooks to turn towards, with two small sticks one finger's width apart, to turn the main stick; then tie the ligaments among the joints at the end of the turning stick near the head and the other ligament toward the fingers on the opposite turning stick, and each assistant turns their respective turning stick until all are aligned, and the master adjusts the spine equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 When they are equalized, place the drying agent with an abundance of heat, then the poultices, and then the splint from a tablet of three ounces in length, which points toward restoring the correct position of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine; then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use subtle easing for the patient until they are well again; and if any issue arises at the end regarding their healing, administer medicines that soften and soothe, using the splint we mentioned earlier; never apply a piece of iron to it, nor does the appearance ever occur in the rear spine vertebrae, causing one to think it is dislocated; this is due to bone fracture, so there should be no presumption: perhaps it could bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip joint dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is said that hip and shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone, not as with other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: above and below, front and back, more internally than externally, less so in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the recognition of its dislocation is such that when joining the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer and more bent than the sound, and the patient cannot bend their affected knee at fire; and are the legs which are swollen near an abscess hot due to the hip's head coming close.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who it comes upon soon, is such that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign for those who it comes upon before, is that they are well with their leg according to completion; however, not doubling the pain in his back, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so yet, and retains his urine, and becomes swoleby, and when it walks, he passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who experience it later include not being able to expand their scrotum or double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the pain eases, and the shoulder head is in place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this type of dislocation is that you should check if the dislocation occurred earlier and it stays depending on its positioning, there is no need for treatment; and one must not have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocations, quickly return the joint to its place, extend it forward and backward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will correct itself, and no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must dress the limb strongly and support the leg firmly with hands or binds under the knee; other assistants extend their hand over it so that they place their hands beneath its elbow, then grip them tightly below the hip; others hold onto the ligament; all stretch upwards and downwards at once until the patient is raised from the ground completely, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four types, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, you must provide care in the way of dislocations if it is at the jawbone, then you must soak the patient's chest on either side, and place a ligature around the hip root, and the one that is under the angle, then extend the ligature toward the thigh; then secure other assistants with their arms, and embrace the large dislocation of the jaw maladies, and stretch it out properly: now it will return to its place; this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then tie the two feet of the malady together with a strong slim ligature on both heels and knees, and keep the affected leg extended at least as much as the other; then hang them from the head of a staff, and suspended from ground level, their arms stretched long; then instruct another minister to embrace the chest's top, and have others hanging with the malady, who firmly hold its entirety, for the joint returns immediately.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 When the dislocation is in the buttocks, place the patient on their back as with sciatica, and draw up the limb properly, and at the foot also; then set four pegs, one at the head and one at each toe; then insert a taper between the thighs towards the malady near its form; and wrap damp cloths around it so that the limb does not move, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirror puts equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 But if not, place on a table and press as we have said with sciatica, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	When the dislocation is in front, it must be quickly extended with the affected leg, and according to what I have said; place your mirror on the pain of being above the evil limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 If the dislocation is on the other side, do not extend or lift the patient's arm, but ensure it rests as if the elbow was dislocated previously while lying down with both arms; place a splint along their face and extend using methods mentioned earlier for support over the joint; once the legs are extended and equal in length, then position pillows, straps from a bandage so that the arm does not move; rest for three or four days before unstrapping; reapply the splint underneebody; if they appear even, use the same wrapping method as before and leave for three days; afterwards, have them walk gently until fully healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of shoulder joint dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joint is dislocated in three ways: this includes from within outwards and downwards, but not forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Tell the patient to bend their leg towards their hip, and if it doesn't reach the hip, understand that they are dislocated; the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, extend their leg as much as possible, place your back against their face, and position their foot on top of yours. Then take hold of their heel with your hands, separate them between your thumbs, then fold both knees gently; other methods involve extending the foot until the kneecap returns to its original position, and the sign is that they can properly bend their leg towards their hip slightly; apply a plaster thereon, massage the leg against the thigh strongly for III or IV days, then release it. The patient should not move at all until the limb is reinforced.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not severely injured, then it should be gently straightened as we have said in the treatment of the elbow, until it becomes sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	For a dislocated ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes emaciated, and never completely realigned or properly supported.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and one must try to move it towards the part where it was dislocated: the reductions should be gentle, and it should be extended carefully by hand when barely touched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, with the injured leg extended by your hands above the anpsle; then grasp the foot with both hands and pull gently upward twice, first to yourself, then away from you once more; elevate the foot gradually. Then place the foot firmly overhead; repeat this procedure twice as we have described, pulling and guiding the foot through its range of motion; if it returns, that is good; if not, resume the process because it will return; and if it cannot be returned in this manner, lay the patient supine on the ground with a strap securely placed between his thighs to keep him from moving while being manipulated. Next, grasp one thigh by your assistants and have them extend the injured leg towards their belt or girdle, ensuring that they support it at the knee; then gradually straighten each assistant's hand in turn, with the strap keeping the patient still as you stretch him out; next place the splints evenly to stabilize the dislocated joint while extending; finally, have one attendant perform the realignment using their hands above the injured leg.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it reaches this point, apply the bandage and pour dressings on it, stretch firmly, bind the shin to the leg, and watch for nerves behind the ankle so that the ties are not too tight; then let it be for two or three days, and if the ties loosen, strain again; then release after four days or a quarter of a day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if it goes beyond this timeframe, it is not assured that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses arise, as we have said elsewhere, it is necessary to soothe them until they are healed.
des dois	Of the two joints
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both joints are dislocated, they must be stretched carefully, it is a light task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the dislocation is in any of these joints, it is necessary to make the patient sit with their back and leg straight or on a table, place your foot under these joints, then press firmly on your foot until you feel relief; and when they are even, and there is no pain, place a table with two legs under the foot's sole, then strain firmpressure, and let it be for three days, then release, and allow rest until healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation, and you see it needs to be repaired, many times the patient dies: do not be overly confident in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it long, nor if you are not compassebt, merciful, and slow; and begin with soothing treatments for abscesses hot, and let the sick leave to God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place as soon as possible, that way the abscess does come out; and once the member is in place, apply calming treatments for abscesses hot, and heal the wound as it should be, with dry ointments; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are torn loose, then perform what we have said regarding simple illnesses; and protect yourself from entering a path of fear, as I have said, for it brings consequences according to your Creator, and because of the state of your armor and body.
Amen	 May peace come to us from
